
22102043819 







THE DESCENT OF MAN 

AND 


SELECTION IN EELATION TO SEX 


WORKS BY CHARLES DARWIN. F-R-S. 


LIFE AND LETTERS OF CHARLES DARWIN. With an 
Autobiographical Chapter. Edited by Francis Darwin. Portraits. 3 vols. 
36». Popular Edition. Condensed in 1 vol. 7s 6d. 

NATURALISTS JOURNAL OF RESEARCHES INTO THE 

Natural History and Gkolooy of Countries visited during a Voyage 
Round the World. With 100 Illustrations by Pritchett. 21s. Popular 
Edition. Woodcuts. 3s. &d. Cheaper Edition, 2s. 6d. net. 

ORIGIN OF SPECIES BY MEANS OF NATURAL SELEC- 
TION ; or, The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for 
Life. Large Type Edition, 2 vols. 12s. Popular Edition, 6s. Cheaper Edition 
with Portrait, 2s. 6d. net. 

VARIOUS CONTRIVANCES BY WHICH ORCHIDS ARE 

FERTILIZED BY INSECTS. Woodcuts. 7s. 6d. 

VARIATION OF ANIMALS AND PLANTS UNDER DO- 

MESTICATION. Illustrations. 15s. 

DESCENT OF MAN, AND SELECTION IN RELATION TO 

SEX. Illustrations. Large Type Edition, 2 vols. 15s. Popular Edition, 7s 6d. 
Cheaper Edition, 2s. 6d. net. 

EXPRESSION OF THE EMOTIONS IN MAN AND ANIMALS. 

Illustrations. 12s. 

INSECTIVOROUS PLANTS. Illustrations. 9s. 

MOVEMENTS AND HABITS OF CLIMBING PLANTS. 

Woodcuts. 6s. 

GROSS AND SELF-FERTILIZATION IN THE VEGETABLE 

KINGDOM. Illustrations. 9s. 

DIFFERENT FORMS OF FLOWERS ON PLANTS OF THE 

SAME SPECIES. Illustrations. 7s. 6d. 

FORMATION OF VEGETABLE MOULD THROUGH THE 

ACTION OF WORMS. Woodcuts. 6s. 

The above works are Published by JOHN MURRAY. 

STRUCTURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF CORAL REEFS. 

Smith, Elder, & Co. 

GEOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON VOLCANIC ISLANDS 

AND PARTS OF SOUTH AMERICA. Smith, Elder, & Co. 

MONOGRAPH OF THE CIRRIPEDIA. Illustrations. 2 vols. 

8vo. Ray Society. 

MONOGRAPH OF THE FOSSIL LEPADID^, OR PEDUN- 

CULATBD CIRRIPEDS OF GREAT BRITAIN. 

PALiEONTOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY. 

MONOGRAPH OF THE FOSSIL BALANIDuE AND VER- 

RUCID.® OF GREAT BRITAIN. PalaiOntographical Society. 


THE 


DESCENT OF MAN 

AND 

SELECTION IN RELATION TO SEX 

By CHARLES DARWIN, M.A., F.R.S. 


NEW EDITION 


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS 


LONDON 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET 
1901 




UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME 


THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES, BY MEANS OF NATURAL 

SELECTION ; or, The Preservation of Favoured Races 
IN THE Struggle for Life. Fopular Edition, with a Photo- 
gravure Portrait, Large Crown Svo. 2s. 6d. net. 

A NATFFRALIST’S VOYAGE. Journal of Researches 
INTO THE Natural History and Geology of the 
Countries visited during the Voyage of H.M.S. 
“Beagle” round the World, under the Command 
OF Capt. Fitz Roy, R.N. Popular Edition, with many 
Illustrations. Large Crown Svo. 2s. 6d. nei. 


1 

1 ' ^ 

' Csli j 

1 

j No. 1 






PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 


During the successive reprints of the first edition of 
this work, published in 1871, I was able to introduce 
several important corrections ; and now that more 
time has elapsed, I have endeavoured to profit by the 
fiery ordeal through which the book has passed, and 
have taken advantage of all the criticisms which seem 
to me sound. I am also greatly indebted to a large 
number of correspondents for the communication of a 
surprising number of new facts and remarks. These 
have been so numerous, that I have been able to use 
only the more important ones ; and of these, as well as 
of the more important corrections, I will append a list. 
Some new illustrations have been introduced, and four 
of the old drawings have been replaced by better ones, 
done from life by Mr. T. W. Wood. I must especially 
call attention to some observations which I owe to the 
kindness of Prof. Huxley (given as a supplement at the 
end of Part I.), on the nature of the differences between 
the brains of man and the higher apes. I have been 
particularly glad to give these observations, because 
during the last few years several memoirs on the 
subject have appeared on the Continent, and their 
importance has been, in some cases, greatly ex- 
aggerated by popular writers. 


viii PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

I may take this opportunity of remarking that my 
critics frequently assume that I attribute all changes 
of corporeal structure and mental power exclusively to 
the natural selection of such variations as are often 
called spontaneous ; whereas, even in the first edition 
of the ‘Origin of Species,’ I distinctly stated that 
great weight must be attributed to the inherited 
effects of use and disuse, with respect both to the 
body and mind. I also attributed some amount of 
modification to the direct and prolonged action of 
changed conditions of life. Some allowance, too, 
must be made for occasional reversions of structure; 
nor must we forget what I have called “ correlated ” 
growth, meaning, thereby, that various parts of the 
organisation are in some unknown manner so con- 
nected, that when one part varies, so do others ; and 
if variations in the one are accumulated by selection, 
other parts will be modified. Again, it has been said 
by several critics, that when I found that many details 
of structure in man could not be explained through 
natural selection, I invented sexual selection ; I gave, 
however, a tolerably clear sketch of this principle in 
the first edition of the ‘ Origin of Species,’ and I there 
stated that it was applicable to man. This subject of 
sexual selection has been treated at full length in the 
present work, simply because an opportunity was 
here first afforded me. I have been struck with the 
likeness of many of the half-favourable criticisms on 
sexual selection, with those which appeared at first on 
natural selection ; such as, that it would explain some 
few details, but certainly was not applicable to the 
extent to which I have employed it. My conviction of 
the power of sexual selection remains unshaken ; but it 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 


IX 


is probable, or almost certain, that several of my 
conclusions will hereafter be found erroneous ; this 
can hardly fail to be the case in the first treatment of 
a subject. When naturalists have become familiar 
with the idea of sexual selection, it will, as I believe, 
be much more largely accepted; and it has already 
been fully and favourably received by several capable 
iudges. 

Down, Beckenham, Kent, 

SeptemheTy 1874. 

First Edition Feb. 24, 1871 

Second Edition Sept., 1874. 







■# ■' 


y’ 

•V. ' 


K'. ' 



■/i mc^^xB . ^I^T or 

7fa 5o , If i^yea iaxli ^akho-v ^ 

; ejyoenoi^^ tflrm>l od ..i<^rt<ie;iaj[{ 

/T; lo ia'jft atl) «j eift fiaj 

i/iilicrt^l omapeJ -iiQffW, .n 

, 1 8f Jilw, <0(piio0j[8^ kr/xes lQ, ii^, ,9d[i 4^xw 

X^mils BXid Jx 5js^p; bsiqd-of>a yjo’^x^ . 




f if -i 




Cs ■ -c4 

1.iv<tifi : • v..' 

f;r’R:'t W ii:'>vio iV’C OitHTfA''.';;; ^ ,i »V r 
:y^..r-% ■::,!% -^y<i kryr -tL.,; i 

” f"-- ''bv, ■ 


^ .... 


_ •• -‘i- ojf iKg 
.-'' ii«l' 


■^het s .•-^::Ui€.:< r \jk 

’^v- • - "r •«vl. 



o'viif^ V.'-: -o ^ -rr- .iamvT ' . •’ . i- i:a& 

■•; <'f‘‘:^:8; tliat v-l^-'l ■'•^•.:* t‘ ’^tbasny; 

c^i'.ak'U •:••;;■ v. *.'.::»?= oe^d'a^i; «r'w> '4^^ 
fetttarii^^' Lvi ,. : ,? :jtuaS'* :^•v^^tt;'-t■4 

■■' ^ ■•**■• ‘‘ rd;t.oi: tho . •• ^ 

’ . M :t .' b 'liik.(er'',v';; ir 

r. b.>vt] 

- ' • , • ‘ ,---i ■-T''- •- ■-■ ■■ . wSe'-. 

' -.rlv; :b :i:-b ‘ .:-f 

‘ cae :_"*• .;i0. 'r bi^'rij 

^ ^I'kct'ou; *570 '■• ' 


.'. '. I’lf • •’» J!*:i 




^’-" k.; k ; b-- :■ .i 



a 





CONTENTS, 


Introduction 


Pages 1-5 


PAKT L 

THE DESCENT OR ORIGIN OF MAN. 

CHAPTER I. 

The Evidence of the Descent op Man from some 
Lower Form. 

PAGE 

Nature of the evidence bearing on the origin of man — Homo- 
logous structures in man and the lower animals — Mis- 
cellaneous points of correspondence — Development — 
Rudimentary structures, muscles, sense-organs, hair, bones, 
reproductive organs, &c. — The bearing of these three great 
classes of facts on the origin of man .... 6 


CHAPTER II. 

On the Manner or Development of Man from some 
Lower Form. 

Variability of body and mind in man — Inheritance — Causes 
of variability — Laws of variation the same in man as in the 
lower animals— Direct action of the conditions of life — 
Effects of the increased use and disuse of parts — Arrested 
development — Reversion — Correlated variation — Rate of 
increase — Checks to increase — Natural selection — ^Man the 
most dominant animal in the world — Importance of his 
corporeal structure — The causes which have led to his 


Xll 


CONTENTS. 


rAOK 

becoming erect — Consequent changes of structure — De- 
crease in size of the canine teeth — Increased size and 
altered shape of the skull — Nakedness — Absence of a tail — 
Defenceless condition of man ..... 38 


CHAPTER III. 

Comparison op the Mental Powers op Man and the 
Lower Animals. 

The difference in mental power between the highest ape and 
the lowest savage, immense — Certain instincts in common 
— The emotions — Curiosity — Imitation — Attention — 
Memory — Imagination — Reason — Progressive improvement 
— I'ools and weapons used by animals — Abstraction, Self- 
consciousness — Language — Sense of beauty — Belief in God, 
spiritual agencies, superstitions . . , , , 98 


CHAPTER IV. 

Comparison of the Mental Powers of Man and the 
Lower Animals — continued . 

The moral sense— Fundamental proposition — The qualities of 
social animals — Origin of sociability — Struggle between 
opposed instincts — Man a social animal — The more 
enduring social instincts conquer other less persistent 
instincts — The social virtues alone regarded by savages — 

The self-regarding virtues acquired at a later stage of 
development — The importance of the judgment of the 
members of the same community on conduct — Transmission 
of moral tendencies — Summary 148 


CHAPTER V. 

On the Development of the Intellectual and Moral 
Faculties during Primeval and Civilised times. 

Advancement of the intellectual powers through natural 
selection—* Importance of imitation — Social and moral 


CONTENTS. 


Xlll 


PAOS 

faculties — Their development within the limits of the same 
tribe — Natural selection as affecting civilised nations — 
Evidence that civilised nations were once barbarous , . 195 


CHAPTER VI. 

Om THE Affinities and Genealogy of Man. 

Position of man in the animal series — The natural system 
genealogical — Adaptive characters of slight value — 
Various small points of resemblance between man and the 
Quadrumana — Rank of man in the natural system — Birth- 
place and antiquity of man — Absence of fossil connecting- 
links — Lower stages in the genealogy of man, as inferred 
firstly from his afidnities and secondly from his structure — 

Early androgynous condition of the Vertebrata — Con- 
clusion ......... 225 


CHAPTER VII. 

On the Races of Man. 

The nature and value of specific characters — Application to 
the races of man — Arguments in favour of, and opposed to, 
ranking the sO' called races of man as distinct species — Sub- 
species — Monogenists and polygenists — Convergence of 
character — Numerous points of resemblance in body and 
mind between the most distinct races of man — The state of 
man when he first spread over the earth — Each race not 
descended from a single pair — The extinction of races — 
The formation of races — The effects of crossing — Slight 
influence of the direct action of the conditions of life — 
Slight or no influence of natural selection— Sexual selec- 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


PART II. 

SEXUAL SELECTION. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Peinoiples of Sexual Selection. 

PVQB 

Secondary sexual characters — Sexual selection — Manner of 
action — Excess of males— Polygamy — The male alone 
generally modified through sexual selection — Eagerness of 
the male — Variability of the male — Choice exerted by the 
female — Sexual compared with natural selection — Inheri- 
tance at corresponding periods of life, at corresponding 
seasons of the year, and as limited by sex — Relations 
between the several forms of inheritance — Causes why one 
sex and the young are not modified through sexual 
selection — Supplement on the proportional numbers of the 
two sexes throughout the animal kingdom — The proportion 
of the sexes in relation to natural selection . . . 319 


CHAPTER IX. 

Secondary Sexual Characters in the Lower 
Classes of the Animal Kingdom. 

These characters are absent in the lowest classes — Brilliant 
colours — Mollusca — Annelids — Crustacea, secondary sexual 
characters strongly developed ; dimorphism ; colour ; 
characters not acquired before maturity — Spiders, sexual 
colours of ; stridulation by the males — Myriapoda . , 400 


CHAPTER X. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Insects. 

Diversified structures possessed by the males for seizing the 
females — Differences between the sexes, of which the 
meaning is not understood — Difference in size between the 


CONTENTS 


XV 


PAGE 

sexes — Thysanura — Diptera — Hemiptera — Homoptera, musical 
powers possessed by the males alone — Orthoptera, musical 
instruments of the males, much diversified in structure ; 
pugnacity ; colours — Neuroptera, sexual differences in colour 
— Hynienoptera, pugnacity and odours — Coleoptera, colours ; 
furnished with great horns, apparently as an ornament ; 
battles ; stridulating organs generally common to both sexes 422 


CHAPTER XI. 

Insects, continued . — Order Lepidoptera. 

(Butterflies and moths.) 

Courtship of Butterflies — Battles — Ticking noise — Colours 
common to both sexes, or more brilliant in the males — 
Examples — Not due to the direct action of the conditions of 
life — Colours adapted for protection — Colours of moths — Dis- 
play — Perceptive powers of the Lepidoptera — Variability — 
Causes of the difference in colour between the males and 
females — Mimicry, female butterflies more brilliantly coloured 
than the males — Bright colours of caterpillars — Summary and 
concluding remarks on the secondary sexual character of in- 
sects — Birds and insects compared 470 


CHAPTER XII. 

Secondary Sexual Chara.cters of Fishes, Amphibians, 
AND Reptiles. 

Fishes : Courtship and battles of the males — Larger size of the 
females — Males, bright colours and ornamental appendages ; 
other strange characters — Colours and appendages acquired 
by the males during the breeding-season alone — Fishes with 
both sexes brilliantly coloured — Protective colours — The less 
conspicuous colours of the female cannot be accounted for on 
the principle of protection — Male fishes building nests, and 
taking charge of the ova and young. Amphibians : Differ- 
ences in structure and colour between the sexes — Vocal organs. 


XVI 


CONTENTS 


PAGK 

Reptiles ; Chelonians — Crocodiles — Snakes, colours in some 
cases protective — Lizards, battles of — Ornamental appendages 
— Strange differences in structure between the sexes — Colours 
— Sexual differences almost as great as with birds . . .507 


CHAPTER XIII. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Birds. 

Sexual differences — Law of battle — Special weapons — Vocal 
organs — Instrumental music — Love-antics and dances — Decora- 
tions, permanent and seasonal — Double and single annual 
moults — Display of ornaments by the males .... 649 


CHAPTER XIV. 

Birds — continued . 

Choice exerted by the female — Length of courtship — Unpaired 
birds — Mental qualities and taste for the beautiful — Preference 
or antipathy shewn by the female for particular males — Varia- 
bility of birds — Variations sometimes abrupt — Laws of varia- 
tion — Formation of ocelli — Gradations of character — Case of 
Peacock, Argus pheasant, and Urosticte .... 616 


CHAPTER XV. 

Birds — continued . 

Discussion as to why the males alone of some species, and both 
sexes of others are brightly coloured — On sexually -limited in- 
heritance, as applied to various structures and to brightly- 
coloured plumage — Nidification in relation to colour — Loss of 
nuptial plumage during the winter 676 


CONTENTS 


IVll 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Birds — concluded. 


PAOB 

The immature plumage in relation to the character of the 
plumage in both sexes when adult — Six classes of cases — 
Sexual differences between the males of closely-allied or re- 
presentative species — The female assuming the characters of 
the male — Plumage of the young in relation to the summer 
and winter plumage of the adults — On the increase of beauty 
in the birds of the world — Protective colouring — Conspicuously 
coloured birds — Novelty appreciated — Summary of the four 
chapters on birds . . . . . . . #707 


CHAPTER XVII. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals. 

The law of battle — Special weapons, confined to the males — 

Cause of absence of weapons in the female — Weapons 
common to both sexes, yet primarily acquired by the male 
— Other uses of such weapons — Their high importance — Greater 
size of the male — Means of defence — On the preference shewn 
by either sex in the pairing of quadrupeds .... 763 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals — continued. 

Voice — Remarkable sexual peculiarities in seals — Odour — De- 
velopment of the hair — Colour of the hair and skin — Anomalous 
case of the female being more ornamented than the male — 
Colour and ornaments due to sexual selection — Colour acquired 
for the sake of protection — Colour, though common to both 
sexes, often due to sexual selection — On the disappearance of 
spots and stripes in adult quadrupeds — On the colours and 
ornaments of the Quadrumana — Summarv .... 802 

h 


XVlll 


CONTENTS 


PART III. 

SEXUAL SELECTION IN RELATION TO MAN, 

AND CONCLUSION. 


CHAPTER XIX. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Man. 

PAGE 

Differences between man and woman — Causes of such differences, 
and of certain characters common to both sexes — Law of battle 
— Differences in mental powers, and voice — On the influence of 
beauty in determining the marriages of mankind — Attention 
paid by savages to ornaments — Their ideas of beauty in women 
— The tendency to exaggerate each natural peculiarity . . 84(5 


CHAPTER XX. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Man — continued . 

On the effects of the continued selection of women according to 
a different standard of beauty in each race — On the causes 
which interfere with sexual selection in civilised and savage 
nations — Conditions favourable to sexual selection during 
primeval times — On the manner of action of sexual selection 
with mankind — On the women in savage tribes having some 
power to choose their husbands — Absence of hair on the body, 
and development of the beard — Colour of the skin — Summary 892 


CONTENTS 


XIX 


CHAPTER XXL 

General Summary and Conclusion. 

PAGE 

Main conclusion that man is descended from some lower form. — 
Manner of development — Genealogy of man — Intellectual and 
moral faculties — Sexual selection — Concluding remarks . . 926 


Supplemental Note 948 

Index * , . . . 955 




sent 







■"■S' 

% f 


.IZX ^TIAHO 


.MOK^vF^HoO fllLA YHAW. 




' _ and -la-xot moSi f«-i^ -"'f- 


?(•« 

OuQ 




U^. 


VWZ JAT^ i 

. . xaanl 


^^■. *^,v ’•■ '-7.::. 



THE DESCENT OE MAN ; 

AND 


SELECTION IN RELATION TO SEX. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The nature of the following work will be best under- 
stood by a brief account of how it came to be written. 
During many years I collected notes on the origin or 
descent of man, without any intention of publishing 
on the subject, but rather with the determination not 
to publish, as I thought that I should thus only add to 
the prejudices against my views. It seemed to me 
sufficient to indicate, in the first edition of my ‘ Origin 
of Species,’ that by this work “ light would be thrown 
“ on the origin of man and his history ; ” and this 
implies that man must be included with other organic 
beings in any general conclusion respecting his manner 
of appearance on this earth. Now the case wears a 
wholly different aspect. When a naturalist like Carl 
Vogt ventures to say in his address as President of the 
National Institution of Geneva (1869), ‘‘personne, en 
“Europe au moins, n’ose plus soutenir la creation 

B 


2 


INTRODUCTION. 


“ independante et de toutes pieces, des especes,” it is 
manifest that at least a large number of naturalists 
must admit that species are the modified descendants 
of other species ; and this especially holds good with 
the younger and rising naturalists. The greater 
number accept the agency of natural selection ; 
though some urge, whether with justice the future 
must decide, that I have greatly overrated its im- 
portance. Of the older and honoured chiefs in natural 
science, many unfortunately are still opposed to 
evolution in every form. 

In consequence of the views now adopted by most 
naturalists, and which will ultimately, as in every 
other case, be followed by others who are not scientific, 
I have been led to put together my notes, so as to see 
how far the general conclusions arrived at in my 
former works were applicable to man. This seemed 
all the more desirable, as I had never deliberately 
applied these views to a species taken singly. When 
we confine our attention to any one form, we are 
deprived of the weighty arguments derived from the 
nature of the affinities which connect together whole 
groups of organisms — their geographical distribution 
in past and present times, and their geological 
succession. The homological structure, embryological 
development, and rudimentary organs of a species 
remain to be considered, whether it be man or any 
other animal, to which our attention may be directed ; 
but these great classes of facts afford, as it appears to 
me, ample and conclusive evidence in favour of the 
principle of gradual evolution. The strong support 
derived from the other arguments should, however, 
always be kept before the mind. 


INTRODUCTION. 


3 


The sole object of this work is to consider, firstly, 
whether man, like every other species, is descended 
from some pre-existing form ; secondly, the manner of 
his development ; and thirdly, the value of the differ- 
ences between the so-called races of man. As I shall 
confine myself to these points, it will not be necessary 
to describe in detail the differences between the several 
races — an enormous subject which has been fully 
discussed in many valuable works. The high antiquity 
of man has recently been demonstrated by the labours 
of a host of eminent men, beginning with M. Boucher 
de Perthes ; and this is the indispensable basis for 
understanding his origin. I shall, therefore, take this 
conclusion for granted, and may refer my readers to 
the admirable treatises of Sir Charles Lyell, Sir John 
Lubbock, and others. Nor shall I have occasion to do 
more than to allude to the amount of difference 
between man and the anthropomorphous apes; for 
Prof. Huxley, in the opinion of most competent 
judges, has conclusively shewn that in every visible 
character man differs less from the higher apes, than 
these do from the lower members of the same order of 
Primates. 

This work contains hardly any original facts in 
regard to man ; but as the conclusions at which I 
arrived, after drawing up a rough draft, appeared -to 
me interesting, I thought that they might interest 
others. It has often and confidently been asserted, 
that man’s origin can never be known : but ignorance 
more frequently begets confidence than does know- 
ledge : it is those who know little, and not those who 
know much, who so positively assert that this or that 
problem will never be solved by science. The con- 


4 


INTRODUCTION. 


elusion that man is the co-descendant with other 
species of some ancient, lower, and extinct form, is 
not in any degree new. Lamarck long ago came to 
this conclusion, which has lately been maintained by 
several eminent naturalists and philosophers ; for 
instance, by Wallace, Huxley, Lyell, Vogt, Lubbock, 
Biichher, Eolle, &c.,^ and especially by Hackel. This 
last naturalist, besides his great work, ‘ Generelle 
Morphologie ’ (1866), has recently (1868, with a 
second edit, in 1870), published his ‘ Natiirliche 
Schopfungsgeschichte,’ in which he fully discusses the 
genealogy of man. If this work had appeared before 
my essay had been written, I should probably never 
have completed it. Almost all the conclusions at 
which 1 have arrived I find confirmed by this 
naturalist, whose knowledge on many points is much 
fuller than mine. Wherever I have added any fact or 
view from Prof. Hackel’s writings, I give his authority 
in the text ; other statements I leave as they originally 
stood in my manuscript, occasionally giving in the 
foot-notes references to his works, as a confirmation of 
the more doubtful or interesting points. 


^ As the works of the first- 
named authors are so well known, 
I need not give the titles; but 
as those of the latter are less 
well known in England, I will 
give them : — ‘Seeks Vorlesungen 
liber die Darwin’sche Theorie : ’ 
zweite Aufiage, 1868, von Dr. 
L. Buchner ; translated into 
French under the title ‘ Con- 
ferences sur la Theorie Darwin- 
ienne,’ 1869. ‘ Der Mensch, im 

Lichte der Darwin’sche Lehre,’ 
1865, von Dr. F. Rolle. I will 
not attempt to give references 


to aU the authors who have 
taken the same side of the 
question. Thus Gr. Canestrini 
has published (‘Annuario della 
Soc. d. Nat.,’ Modena, 1867, p. 
81) a very curious paper on 
rudimentary characters, as bear- 
ing on the origin of man. 
Another work has (1869) been 
published by Dr. Francesco 
Barrago, bearing in Italian the 
title of “Man, made in the 
“ image of God, was also made 
“ in the image of the ape.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 

During many years it has seemed to me highly 
probable that sexual selection has played an important 
part in differentiating the races of man ; but in my 
‘ Origin of Species ’ (first edition, p. 199) I contented 
myself by merely alluding to this belief. When I 
came to apply this view to man, I found it indis- 
pensable to treat the whole subject in full detail.^ 
Consequently the second part of the present work, 
treating of sexual selection, has extended to an 
inordinate length, compared with the first part; but 
this could not he avoided. 

1 had intended adding to the present volumes an 
essay on the expression of the various emotions by 
man and the lower animals. My attention was called 
to this subject many years ago by Sir Charles BelFs 
admirable work. This illustrious anatomist maintains 
that man is endowed with certain muscles solely for 
the sake of expressing his emotions. As this view is 
obviously opposed to the belief that man is descended 
from some other and lower form, it was necessary for 
me to consider it. I likewise wished to ascertain how 
far the emotions are expressed in the same manner by 
the different races of man. But owing to the length 
of the present work, I have thought it better to 
reserve my essay for separate publication. 

2 Prof. Hackel was the only importance, since the publica- 
author who, at the time when tion of the ‘Origin’; and this 
this work first appeared, had he did in a very able manner in 
discussed the subject of sexual his various works. 

selection, and had seen its full 


6 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut 1. 


Part I. 

THE DESCENT OR ORIOIN OF MAN. 


CHAPTEE I. 

The Evidence of the Descent op Man from 
SOME Lower Form. 

Nature of the evidence hearing on the origin of man — Homologous 
structures in man and the lower animals — Miscellaneous points 
of correspondence — Development — Rudimentary structures, 
muscles, sense-organs, hair, bones, reproductive organs, &c. — 
The bearing of these three great classes of facts on the origin 
of man. 

He who wishes to decide whether man is the modified 
descendant of some pre-existing form, would probably 
first enquire whether man varies, however slightly, in 
bodily structure and in mental faculties ; and if so, 
whether the variations are transmitted to his offspring 
in accordance with the laws which prevail with the 
lower animals. Again, are the variations the result, 
as far as our ignorance permits us to judge, of the 
same general causes, and are they governed by the 
same general laws, as in the case of other organisms ; 
for instance, by correlation, the inherited effects of 
use and disuse, &c. ? Is man subject to similar 
malconformations, the result of arrested development. 


Chap. I. 


HOMOLOGICAL STRUCTURES. 


7 


of reduplication of parts, &c., and does he display in 
any of his anomalies reversion to some former and 
ancient type of structure ? It might also naturally be 
enquired whether man, like so many other animals, 
has given rise to varieties and sub-races, differing 
but slightly from each other, or to races differing so 
much that they must be classed as doubtful species ? 
How are such races distributed over the world ; and 
how, when crossed, do they react on each other in the 
first and succeeding generations ? And so with many 
other points. 

The enquirer would next come to the important 
point, whether man tends to increase at so rapid a 
rate, as to lead to occasional severe struggles for 
existence; and consequently to beneficial variations, 
whether in body or mind, being preserved, and 
injurious ones eliminated. Do the races or species of 
men, whichever term may be applied, encroach on and 
replace one another, so that some finally become 
extinct ? We shall see that all these questions, as 
indeed is obvious in respect to most of them, must be 
answered in the affirmative, in the same manner as 
with the lower animals. But the several considera- 
tions just referred to may be conveniently deferred for 
a time : and we will first see how far the bodily 
structure of man shows traces, more or less plain, of 
his descent from some lower form. In succeeding 
chapters the mental powers of man, in comparison 
with those of the lower animals, will be considered. 

The Bodily Structure of Man , — It is notorious that 
man is constructed on the same general type or model 
• as other mammals. All the bones in his skeleton can 


8 


THE HESCEIS'T OP MAN. 


Pakt 1. 


be compared with corresponding bones in a monkey, 
bat, or seal. So it is with his muscles, nerves, blood- 
vessels and internal viscera. The brain, the most 
important of all the organs, follows the same law, as 
shewn by Huxley and other anatomists. Bischoff,^ 
who is a hostile witness, admits that every chief 
fissure and fold in the brain of man has its analogy in 
that of the orang ; but he adds that at no period of 
development do their brains perfectly agree ; nor 
could perfect agreement be expected, for otherwise 
their mental powers would have been the same. 
Vulpian^ remarks: “ Les differences reelles qui 
“ existent entre I’encephale de I’homme et celui des 
“ singes superieurs, sont bien minimes. II ne faut pas 
“se faire d’illusions a cet egard. ^L’homme est bien 
“ plus pres des singes anthropomorphes par les 
“ caracteres anatomiques de son cerveau que ceux-ci ne 
‘‘le sont non seulement des autres mammiferes, mais 
“ meme de certains quadrumanes, des guenons et des 
“ macaques.” But it would be superfluous here to 
give further details on the correspondence between 
man and the higher mammals in the structure of the 
brain and all other parts of the body. 

It may, however, be worth while to specify a few 
points, not directly or obviously connected with 
structure, by which this correspondence or relation- 
ship is well shewn. 

Man is liable to receive from the lower animals, and 

^ ‘ Grossliirnwindungen des the Appendix alluded to in the 

Menschen,’ 1868, s. 96. 1’he Preface to this edition, 
conclusions of this author, as ^ ‘ Lef. sur la Phys.’ 1866, p. 
well as those of Gratiolet and 890, as quoted by M. Hally, 

Aeby? concerning the brain, will ‘ L’Ordre des Primates et le 

be discussed by Prof. Huxley in Transformisme,’ 1868, p. 29. 


Chai’. I. 


HOMOLOGICAL STRUCTURES. 


9 


to communicate to them, certain diseases, as hydro- 
phobia, variola, the glanders, syphilis, cholera, herpes, 
&c. ; ^ and this fact proves the close similarity ^ of 
their tissues and blood, both in minute structure and 
composition, far more plainly than does their com- 
parison under the best microscope, or by the aid of 
the best chemical analysis. Monkeys are liable to 
many of the same non-contagious diseases as we are ; 
thus Eengger,^ who carefully observed for a long time 
the Cebus Azarm in its native land, found it liable to 
catarrh, with the usual symptoms, and which, when 
often recurrent, led to consumption. These monkeys 
suffered also from apoplexy, inflammation of the 
bowels, and cataract in the eye. The younger ones 
when shedding their milk-teeth often died from fever. 
Medicines produced the same effect on them as on us. 
Many kinds of monkeys have a strong taste for tea, 
coffee, and spirituous liquors : they will also, as I have 
myself seen, smoke tobacco with pleasure.® Brehm 
asserts that the natives of north-eastern Africa catch 


® Dr. W. Lauder Lindsay has 
treated this subject at some 
length in the ‘ Journal of Mental 
Science,’ July 1871 ; and in the 
‘ Edinburgh Veterinary Review,’ 
July 1858. 

^ A Reviewer has criticised 
( ‘ British Quarterly Review,’ 
Oct. 1st, 1871, p. 472) what I 
have here said with much se- 
verity and contempt ; but as I 
do not use the term identity, I 
cannot see that I am greatly in 
error. There appears to me a 
sti'ong analogy between the 
same infection or contagion pro- 
ducing the same result, or one 


closely similar, in two distinct 
animals, and the testing of two 
distinct fluids by the same 
chemical reagent. 

® ‘Naturgeschichte der Sauge- 
thiere von Paraguay,’ 1830, s. 
50. 

® The same tastes are common 
to some animals much lower in 
the scale. Mr. A. Nicols in- 
forms me that he kept in 
Queensland, in Australia, three 
individuals of the Fhaseolarctus 
cinereus ; and that, w ithout 
having been taught in any way, 
they acquired a strong taste for 
rum, and for smoking tobacco. 


10 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I 


the wild baboons by exposing vessels with strong beer, 
by which they are made drunk. He has seen some of 
these animals, which he kept in confinement, in this 
state ; and he gives a laughable account of their 
behaviour and strange grimaces. On the following 
morning they were very cross and dismal ; they held 
their aching heads with both hands, and wore a most 
pitiable expression : when beer or wine was offered 
them, they turned away with disgust, but relished the 
juice of lemons.’ An American monkey, an Ateles, 
after getting drunk on brandy, would never touch it 
again, and thus was wiser than many men. These 
trifling facts prove how similar the nerves of taste must 
be in monkeys and man, and how similarly their whole 
nervous system is afi“ected. 

Man is infested with internal parasites, sometimes 
causing fatal effects ; and is plagued by external 
parasites, all of which belong to the same genera or 
families as those infesting other mammals, and in the 
case of scabies to the same species.® Man is subject, 
like other mammals, birds, and even insects,® to that 
mysterious law, which causes certain normal processes, 
such as gestation, as well as the maturation and 
duration of various diseases, to follow lunar periods. 
His wounds are repaired by the same process of 
healing ; and the stumps left after the amputation of 


Brehm, ‘ Thierleben,’ B. i. 
1864, s. 75, 86. On the Ateles, 
s. 105. For other aoalogous 
statements, see s. 25, 107. 

® Dr. W. Lauder Lindsay, 
‘ Edinburgh Vet. Review,’ July 
1858, p. 13. 

• With respect to insects see 
Dr. Laycock, “On a General 


Law of Vital Periodicity,” 
‘British Association,’ 1842. Dr. 
Macculloch, ‘ Silliman’s North 
American Journal of Science,’ 
vol. xvii. p. 305, has seen a dog 
suffering from tertian ague. 
Hereafter I shall return to this 
subject. 


Chap. I. 


HOMOLOGICAL STEUCTURES. 


11 


his limbs, especially during an early embryonic period, 
occasionally possess some power of regeneration, as in 
the lowest animals.^® 

The whole process of that most important function, 
the reproduction cf the species, is strikingly the same 
in all mammals, from the first act of courtship by the 
male,“ to the birth and nurturing of the young. 
Monkeys are born in almost as helpless a condition as 
our own infants; and in certain genera the young 
differ fully as much in appearance from the adults, as 
do our children from their full-grown parents. It 
has been urged by some writers, as an important 
distinction, that with man the young arrive at 
maturity at a much later age than with any other 
animal : but if we look to the races of mankind which 
inhabit tropical countries the difference is not great, 
for the orang is believed not to be adult till the age of 
from ten to fifteen years. Man differs from woman 


I have given the evidence 
on this head in my ‘ Variation 
of Animals and Plants under 
Domestication,’ vol. ii. p. 15, 
and more could he added. 

Mares e diversis generibus 
Quadrumanorum sine dubio 
dignoscunt feminas human as 
a maribus. Priraum, credo, 
odoratu, postea aspectu. Mr. 
Yonatt, qui diu in Hortis 
Zoologicis (Bestiariis) medicus 
animalium erat, vir in rebus 
observandis cautus et sagax, 
hoc inihi certissimc probavit, et 
curatores ejusdem loci et alii e 
ministris confirmaverimt. Sir 
Andrew Smith et Brehm nota- 
bant idem in Cynocephalo. 
Illustrissimus Cuvier etiam nar- 


rat multa de hS,c re, qu4 ut 
opinor, nihil turpius potest in- 
dicari inter omnia hominibus et 
Quadrumanis communia. Nar- 
rat enim Cynocephalum quen- 
dam in furorem incidere aspectu 
fern inarum aliqnarum, sed ne- 
quaquam accendi tan to furore 
ab omnibus. Semper eligebat 
juniores, et dignoscebat in 
turbd, et advocabat voce gesth- 
que. 

This remark is made with 
respect to Cynocephalus and 
the anthropomorphous apes by 
Geoffioy Saint-Hilaire and F. 
Cuvier, ‘ Hist. Nat. des Mamrni- 
feres,’ tom. i, 1824. 

Huxley, ‘Man’s Place in 
Nature,’ 1863, p. 34. 


12 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


in size, bodily strength, hairiness, &c., as well as in 
mind, in the same manner as do the two sexes of many 
mammals. So that the correspondence in general 
structure, in the minute structure of the tissues, in 
chemical composition and in constitution, between 
man and the higher animals, especially the anthropo- 
morphous apes, is extremely close. 

Embryonic Development . — Man is developed from an 
ovule, about the 125th of an inch in diameter, which 
differs in no respect from the ovules of other animals. 
The embryo itself at a very early period can hardly be 
distinguished from that of other members of the 
vertebrate kingdom. At this period the arteries run 
in arch-like branches, as if to carry the blood to 
branchiae which are not present in the higher verte- 
brata, though the slits on the sides of the neck still 
remain (/, g, fig. 1), marking their former position. 
At a somewhat later period, when the extremities are 
developed, “ the feet of lizards and mammals,’' as the 
illustrious Yon Baer remarks, “ the wings and feet of 
“ birds, no less than the hands and feet of man, all 
“ arise from the same fundamental form.” It is, says 
Prof. Huxley, “quite in the later stages of develop- 
“ ment that the young human being presents marked 
“ differences from the young ape, while the latter 
“ departs as much from the dog in its developments, as 
“ the man does. Startling as this last assertion may 
“ appear to be, it is demonstrably true.” 

As some of my readers may never have seen a draw- 
ing of an embryo, I have given one of man and another 
of a dog, at about the same early stage of develop- 
‘ Mail’s Place in Nature,’ 1863, p. 67. 


Chap. I. 


HOMOLOCICAL STRUCTURES. 


13 


ment, carefully copied from two works of undoubted 
accuracy.^*' 

After the foregoing statements made by such high 
authorities, it would be superfluous on my part to give 
a number of borrowed details, shewing that the embryo 
of man closely resembles that of other mammals. It 
may, however, be added, that the human embryo like- 
wise resembles certain low forms when adult in various 
points of structure. For instance, the heart at first 
exists as a simple pulsating vessel ; the excreta are 
voided through a cloacal passage ; and the os coccyx 
projects like a true tail, ‘‘ extending considerably 
“ beyond the rudimentary legs.”^® In the embryos of 
all air-breathing vertebrates, certain glands, called the 
corpora Wolffiana, correspond with, and act like the 
kidneys of mature fishes.^^ Even at a later embryonic 
period, some striking resemblances between man and 
the lower animals may be observed. Bischoff says 
that the convolutions of the brain in a human foetus 


at the end of the seventh month reach about the same 
stage of development as in a baboon when adult.”^® 
The great toe, as Professor Owen remarks,^® “ which 


The human embryo (upper 
fig.) is from Ecker, ‘ leones 
Phys.,’ 1851-1859, tab. xxx. 
fig. 2. This embryo was ten 
lines in length, so that the draw- 
ing is much magnified. The 
embryo of the dog is from 
Bischoff, ‘ Entwicklungsge- 
schichte des Hunde-Eies,’ 1845, 
tab. xi. fig. 42 b. This drawing 
is five times magnified, the 
embryo being twenty-five days 
old. The internal viscera have 
been omitted, and the uterine 
appendages in both drawings 
removed. I was directed to 


these figures by Prof. Huxley, 
from whose work, ‘ Man’s Place 
in Nature,’ the idea of giving 
them was taken. Hackel has 
also given analogous drawings 
in his ‘ Schbpfungsgeschichte.’ 
Prof. Wyman in ‘ Proc. of 
American Acad, of Sciences,’ 
vol. iv. 1860, p. 17. 

Owen, ‘Anatomy of Verte- 
brates,’ vol. i. p. 533. 

‘ Die Grosshirnwindungen 
des Menschen,’ 1868, s. 95. 

‘ Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ 
vol. ii. p. 553, 


14 


THE DESCENT OF MAN, 


Part L 




Fig. 1. Upper figure human embryo, from Ecker. Lower figure that of a dog, 
from Bischoff. 


a. Fore-brain, cerebral hemispheres, 

4c. 

b. Mid-brain, corpora quadrigemina. 

c. Hind-brain, cerebellum, medulla 
oblongata. 

d. Eye. 

«. Ear. 


f. First visceral arch. 

g. Second visceral arch. 

H. Vertebral columns and muscles 
in process of development. 

L. Tail or os coccyx. 


Chap. I. 


KUDIMENTS. 


15 


“ forms tlie fulcrum when standing or walking, is 
“perhaps the most characteristic peculiarity in the 
“ human structure ; ” hut in an embryo, about an inch 
in length. Prof. Wyman^° found “ that the great toe 
“ was shorter than the others ; and, instead of being 
“ parallel to them, projected at an angle from the side 
“ of the foot, thus corresponding with the permanent 
“ condition of this part in the quadrumana.” I will 
conclude with a quotation from Huxley,^^ who after 
asking, does man originate in a different way from a 
dog, bird, frog or fish ? says, “ the reply is not doubt- 
“ful for a moment; without question, the mode of 
“ origin, and the early stages of the development of man, 
“ are identical with those of the animals immediately 
“ below him in the scale : without a doubt in these 
“ respects, he is far nearer to apes than the apes are to 
“ the dog.” 

Rudiments . — This subject, though not intrinsically 
more important than the two last, will for several 
reasons be treated here more fully.^^ Not one of the 
higher animals can be named which does not bear some 
part in a rudimentary condition ; and man forms no 
exception to the rule. Kudimentary organs must be 
distinguished from those that are nascent ; though in 
some cases the distinction is not easy. The former are 
either absolutely useless, such as the mammae of male 


^ ‘Proc. Soc. Nat. Hist.’ 
Boston, 1863, vol. ix. p. 185. 

^ * Man’s Place in Nature,’ p. 
65. 

I had written a rough copy 
of this chapter before reading a 
valuable paper, “ Caratteri rudi- 
mentali in ordine all’ origine del- 
l’ uomo ” (‘ Annuario della Soc, 


d.Nat.,’ Modena, 1867, j). 81), by 
G. Canestrini, to which paper 
I am considerably indebted. 
Hackel has given admirable dis- 
cussions on this whole subject, 
under the title of Dysteleology, 
in his ‘ Generelle Morphologie ’ 
and ‘ Schopfungsgeschichte.’ 


16 


TPIE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


quadrupeds, or the incisor teeth of ruminants which 
never cut through the gums; or they are of such 
slight service to their present possessors, that we can 
hardly suppose that they were developed under the 
conditions which now exist. Organs in this latter 
state are not strictly rudimentary, but they are* tending 
in this direction. Nascent organs, on the other hand, 
though not fully developed, are of high service to 
their possessors, and are capable of further develop- 
ment. Eudimentary organs are eminently variable ; 
and this is partly intelligible, as they are useless, or 
nearly useless, and consequently are no longer sub- 
jected to natural selection. They often become wholly 
suppressed. When this occurs, they are nevertheless 
liable to occasional reappearance through reversion — 
a circumstance well worthy of attention. 

The chief agents in causing organs to become rudi- 
mentary seem to have been disuse at that period of 
life when the organ is chiefly used (and this is generally 
during maturity), and also inheritance at a corres- 
ponding period of life. The term “ disuse ” does not 
relate merely to the lessened action of muscles, but 
includes a diminished flow of blood to a part or organ, 
from being subjected to fewer alternations of pressure, 
or from becoming in any way less habitually active. 
Eudiments, however, may occur in one sex of those 
parts which are normally present in the other sex ; 
and such rudiments, as we shall hereafter see, have 
often originated in a way distinct from those here 
referred to. In some cases, organs have been reduced 
by means of natural selection, from having become 
injurious to the species under changed habits of life. 
The process of reduction is probably often aided 


Chap. I. 


RUDIMENTS. 


17 


through the two principles of compensation and 
economy of growth ; but the later stages of reduction, 
after disuse has done all that can fairly be attributed 
to it, and when the saving to be effected by the 
economy of growth would be very small,^^ are difficult 
to understand. The final and complete suppression of 
a part, already useless and much reduced in size, in 
which case neither compensation nor economy can 
come into play, is perhaps intelligible by the aid of 
the hypothesis of pangenesis. But as the whole sub- 
ject of rudimentary organs has been discussed and 
illustrated in my former works, I need here say no 
more on this head. 


Eudiments of various muscles have been observed in • 
many parts of the human body ; and not a few 
muscles, which are regularly present in some T the 
lower animals can occasionally be detected in man in 
a greatly reduced condition. Every one must have 
noticed the power which many animals, especially horses, 
possess of moving or twitching their skin ; and this is 
effected by the 'panniculus carnosus. Eemnants of this 
• muscle in an efficient state are found in various parts 
of our bodies ; for instance, the muscle on the fore- 
head, by which the eyebrows are raised. The platysma 
myoicteSy which is well developed on the, neck, belongs 


^ Some good criticisms on 
this subject have been given by 
Messrs. Murie and Mivart, in 
‘Transact. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1869, 
voi. vii. p. 92. 

^ * Variation of Animals and 
Plants under Domestication,’ 
vol. ii. pp. 317 and 397. See 
also ‘ Origin of Species,’ 5th 
edit. p. 535. 

^ For instance M. Richard 

Ann ales des Sciences Nat. 


3rd series, Zoolog. 1852, tom. 
xviii. p. 13) describes and figures 
rudiments of what he calls the 
“muscle pedieux de la main,” 
which he says is sometimes 
“ infiniment petit.” Another 
muscle, called “ le tibial poste- 
rieur,” is generally quite absent 
in the hand, but appears from 
time to time in a more or less 
rudimentary condition - 


Q 


18 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt I. 


to this system. Prof. Turner, of Edinburgh, has 
occasionally detected, as he informs me, muscular 
fasciculi in five different situations, namely in the 
axillae, near the scapulae, &c., all of which must be 
referred to the system of the panniculus. He has 
also shewn^® that the musculus sternalis or sternalis 
hrutorum, which is not an extension of the rectus 
abdominalis, but is closely allied to the panniculus^ 
occurred in the proportion of about three per cent, in 
upwards of 600 bodies: he adds, that this muscle 
affords “ an excellent illustration of the statement 
“ that occasional and rudimentary structures are 
“ especially liable to variation in arrangement.” 

Some few persons have the power of contracting the 
superficial muscles on their scalps ; and these muscles 
are in a variable and partially rudimentary condition. 
M. A. de Candolle has communicated to me a curious 
instance of the long-continued persistence or inheri- 
tance of this power, as well as of its unusual develop- 
ment. He knows a family, in which one member, the 
present head of the family, could, when a youth, pitch ^ 
several heavy books from his head by the movement of 
the scalp alone ; and he won wagers by performing this 
feat. His father, uncle, grandfather, and his three 
children possess the same power to the same unusual 
degree. This family became divided eight generations 
ago into two branches ; so that the head of the above- 
mentioned branch is cousin in the seventh degree to 
the head of the other branch. This distant cousin 
resides in another part of France ; and on being asked 
whether he possessed the same faculty, immediately 
exhibited his power. This case offers a good illustra- 
Prof. W. Turner, ‘Proc. Royal Soc. Edinburgh,’ 18GG-67, p. 65. 


Chap. I. 


RUDIMENTS. 


19 


tion how persistent may be the transmission of an 
absolutely useless faculty, probably derived from our 
remote semi- human progenitors ; since many monkeys 
have, and frequently use the power, of largely moving 
their scalps up and down.^^ 

The extrinsic muscles which serve to move the 
external ear, and the intrinsic muscles which move the 
different parts, are in a rudimentary condition in man, 
and they all belong to the system of the 'panniculus ; they 
are also variable in development, or at least in function. 
I have seen one man who could draw the whole ear 
forwards ; other men can draw it upwards ; another 
who could draw it backwards and from what one of 
these persons told me, it is probable that most of us, 
by often touching our ears, and thus directing our 
attention towards them, could recover some power of 
movement by repeated trials. The power of erecting 
and directing the shell of the ears to the various 
points of the compass, is no doubt of the highest 
service to many animals, as they thus perceive the 
direction of danger; but I have never heard, on 
sufficient evidence, of a man who possessed this power, 
the one which might be of use to him. The whole 
external shell may be considered a rudiment, to- 
gether with the various folds and prominences (helix 
and anti-helix, tragus and anti-tragus, &c.) which in 
the lower animals strengthen and support the ear 
when erect, without adding much to its weight. Some 
authors, however, suppose that the cartilage of the 
shell serves to transmit vibrations to the acoustic 

^ See my ‘ Expression of the (‘ Annuario della Soc. dei 
Emotions in Man and Animals,’ Naturalist!, Modena, 1867, p. 
1872, p. 144. 97) to the same effect. 

Canestrini * quotes Hyrtl. 


20 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


t»ABT I. 


nerve ; but Mr. Toynbee/® after collecting all the 
known evidence on this head, concludes that the 
external shell is of no distinct use. The ears of the 
chimpanzee and orang are curiously like those of 
man, and the proper muscles are likewise hut very 
slightly developed.^® I am also assured by the keepers 
in the Zoological Gardens that these animals never 
move or erect their ears ; so that they are in an equally 
rudimentary condition with those of man, as far as 
function is concerned. Why these animals, as well as 
the progenitors of man, should have lost the power of 
erecting their ears, we cannot say. It may be, though 
I am not satisfied with this view, that owing to their 
arboreal habits and great strength they were but little 
exposed to danger, and so during a lengthened period 
moved their ears but little, and thus gradually lost 
the power of moving them. This would be a parallel 
case with that of those large and heavy birds, which, 
from inhabiting oceanic islands, have not been exposed 
to the attacks of beasts of prey, and have consequently 
lost the power of using their wings for fiight. The 
inability to move the ears in man and several apes is, 
however, partly compensated by the freedom with 
which they can move the head in a horizontal plane, so 
as to catch sounds from all directions. It has been 
asserted that the ear of’ man alone possesses a lobule ; 
but ‘‘ a rudiment of it is found in the gorilla and, as 

^ ‘ The Diseases of the Ear,’ nearly the same conclusion as 
by J. Toynbee, F.K.S., 1860, p. that given here. 

12. A distinguished physiolo- Prof. A. Macalister, ‘An- 

gist. Prof. Preyer, informs me nals and Mag. of Nat. History,’ 
that he had lately been experi- vol. vii., 1871, p. 342. 
nienting on the function of the Mr. St. George Mivart, 

shell of the ear, and has come to ‘ Elementary Anatomy,’ 1873, 

p. 396. 


Chap. L 


RUDIMENTS. 


21 


I hear from Prof. Preyer, it is not rarely absent in the 
negro. 

The celebrated sculptor, Mr. Woolner, informs me of 
one little peculiarity in the external ear, which he has 
often observed both in men and women, and of which 
he perceived the full significance. His attention was 
first called to the subject whilst at work on his figure 
of Puck, to which he had given pointed ears. He was 
thus led to examine the ears of various monkeys, and 
subsequently more carefully 
those of man. The peculiarity 
consists in a little blunt point, 
projecting from the inwardly 
folded margin, or helix. When 
present, it is developed at birth, 
and, according to Prof. Ludwig 
Meyer, more frequently in man 
than in woman. Mr. Woolner 
made an exact model of one such 
case, and sent me the accom- 
panying drawing. (Fig- 2.) 

These points not only project 
inwards towards the centre of the ear, but often a little 
outwards from its plane, so as to be visible when the 
head is viewed from directly in front or behind. They 
are variable in size, and somewhat in position, standing 
either a little higher or lower ; and they sometimes 
occur on one ear and not on the other. They are not 
confined to mankind, for I observed a case in one of the 
spider- monkeys {Ateles heelzebuth) in our Zoological 
Gardens ; and Mr. E. Eay Lankester informs me of 
another case in a chimpanzee in the gardens at Hamburg. 
The helix obviously consists of the extreme margin 



Fig. 2. Human Ear, modelled 
and drawn by Mr. Woolner. 

a. The projecting point. 


22 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


of the ear folded inwards ; and this folding appears 
to be in some manner connected with the whole ex- 
ternal ear being permanently pressed backwards. In 
many monkeys, which do not stand high in the order, as 
baboons and some species of macacus,^^ the upper portion 
of the ear is slightly pointed, and the margin is not at all 
folded inwards ; but if the margin were to be thus folded, 
a slight point would necessarily project inwards towards 
the centre, and probably a little outwards from the 
plane of the ear ; and this I believe to be their origin in 
many cases. On the other hand. Prof. L. Meyer, in an 
able paper recently published, maintains that the 
whole case is one of mere variability ; and that the 
projections are not real ones, but are due to the 
internal cartilage on each side of the points not having 
been fully developed. I am quite ready to admit that 
this is the correct explanation in many instances, as in 
those figured by Prof. Meyer, in which there are 
several minute points, or the whole margin is sinuous. 
I have myself seen, through the kindness of Dr. L. 
Down, the ear of a microcephalous idiot, on which there 
is a projection on the outside of the helix, and not on 
the inward folded edge, so that this point can have no 
relation to a former apex of the ear. Nevertheless in 
some cases, my original view, that the points are 
vestiges of the tips of formerly erect and pointed ears, 
still seems to me probable. I think so from the 
frequency of their occurrence, and from the general 
correspondence in position with that of the tip of a 

See also some remarks, and 1869, pp. 6 and 90. 
the drawings of the ears of the Ueber das Darwin’sche 

Lemuroidea, in Messrs. Murie Spitzohr, Archiv fiir Path, 
and Mivart’s excellent ]>aper in Anat. und Phys. 1871, [). 485. 

‘ 'transact. Zoolog. Soc.’ vol. vii. 


Chap. I. 


RUDIMENTS. 


23 


pointed ear. In one case, of which a photograph has 
been sent me, the projection is so large, that supposing, 
in accordance with Prof. Meyer’s view, the ear to be 
made perfect by the equal development of the cartilage 
throughout the whole extent of the margin, it would 
have covered fully one-third of the whole ear. Two 
cases have been communicated to me, one in North 
America, and the other in England, in which the upper 
margin is not at all folded inwards, hut is pointed, so 
that it closely resembles the pointed ear of an ordinary 
quadruped in outline. In one of these cases, which 
was that of a young child, the father compared the ear 
with the drawing which I have given^^ of the ear of a 
monkey, the Cynopithecus niger, and says that their 
outlines are closely similar. If, in these two cases, the 
margin had been folded inwards in the normal manner, 
an inward projection must have been formed. I may 
add that in two other cases the outline still remains 
somewhat pointed, although the margin of the upper 
part of the ear is normally folded inwards — in one of 
them, however, very narrowly. The following woodcut 
(No. 3) is an accurate copy of a photograph of the 
foetus of an orang (kindly sent me by Dr. Nitsche), in 
which it may be seen how different the pointed outline 
of the ear is at this period from its adult condition, 
when it bears a close general resemblance to that of 
man. It is evident that the folding over of the tip of 
such an ear, unless it changed greatly during its 
further development, would give rise to a point pro- 
jecting inwards. On the whole, it still seems to me 
probable that the points in question are in some cases, 
both in man and apes, vestiges of a former condition. 

^ ‘ The Expressiou of the Emotions,’ p. 136. 


24 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


The nictitating membrane, or third eyelid, with its 
accessory muscles and other structures, is especially 
well developed in birds, and is of much functional 
importance to them, as it can be rapidly drawn across 
the whole eye-ball. It is found in some reptiles and 
amphibians, and in certain fishes, as in sharks. It is 
fairly well developed in the two lower divisions of the 



Fig. 3. Foetus of an Orang. Exact copy of a photograph, shewing the form of 
the car at this early age. 

mammalian series, namely, in the monotremata and 
marsupials, and in some few of the higher mammals, as 
in the walrus. But in man, the quadrumana, and most 
other mammals, it exists, as is admitted by all anato- 
mists, as a mere rudiment, called the semilunar fold.^® 
The sense of smell is of the highest importance to 

^ Muller’s ‘ Elements of ‘ Great Artists and Anatomists,’ 
Physiology,’ Eng. translat., 1842, p. 106. This rudiment ap- 
vol. ii. p. 1117. Owen, ‘ Ana- parently is somewhat larger in 
tomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. p. Negroes and Australians than 
260; ibid, on the Walrus, in Europeans, see Carl Vogt, 
‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ November ‘ Lectures on Man,’ Eng, trans- 
8,th, 1854. See also E. Knox, lat. p. 129, 


Chap. I. 


RUDIMENTS. 


25 


the greater number of mammals — to some, as the 
ruminants, in warning them of danger ; to others, as 
the carnivora, in finding their prey ; to others, again, 
as the wild boar, for both purposes combined. But 
the sense of smell is of extremely slight service, if 
any, even to the dark coloured races of men, in whom 
it is much more highly developed than in the white 
and civilised races.^® Nevertheless it does not warn 


them of danger, nor guide them to their food ; nor 
does it prevent the Esquimaux from sleeping in the 
most fetid atmosphere, nor many savages from eating 
half-putrid meat. In Europeans the power differs 
greatly in different individuals, as I am assured by an 
eminent naturalist who possesses this sense highly 
developed, and who has attended to the subject. Those 
who believe in the principle of gradual evolution, will 
not readily admit that the sense of smell in its present 
state was originally acquired by man, as he now exists. 
He inherits the power in an enfeebled and so far rudi- 
mentary condition, from some early progenitor, to 
whom it was highly serviceable, and by whom it was 
continually used. In those animals which have this 
sense highly developed, such as dogs and horses, the 
recollection of persons and of places is strongly 


The account given by- 
Humboldt of the power of smell 
possessed by the natives of 
South America is well known, 
and has been confirmed by 
others. M. Houzeau (‘I^tudes 
sur les Facultes Mentales,’ &c., 
tom. i. 1872, p. 91) asserts that 
he repeatedly made experiments, 
and proved that Negroes and 
ludians could recognise persons 
in the dark by their odour. Dr. 
W. Ogle has made some curious 


observations on the connection 
between the power of smell and 
the colouring matter of the 
mucous membrane of the ol- 
factory region, as well as of the 
skin of the body. I have, there- 
fore, spoken in the text of the 
dark-coloured races having a 
finer sense of smell than the 
white races. See his paper, 
‘ Medico - Chirurgical ITansac- 
tions,’ London, vol. liii., 1870, p. 
276. 


26 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


associated with their odour ; and we can thus perhaps 
understand how it is, as Dr. Maudsley has truly 
remarked, that the sense of smell in man “ is 
“ singularly effectiye in recalling vividly the ideas and 
“ images of forgotten scenes and places.” 

Man differs conspicuously from all the other 
Primates in being almost naked. But a few short 
straggling hairs are found over the greater part of the 
body in the man, and fine down on that of the woman. 
The different races differ much in hairiness ; and in 
the individuals of the same race the hairs are highly 
variable, not only in abundance, but likewise in 
position : thus in some Europeans the shoulders are 
quite naked, whilst in others they bear thick tufts of 
hair.^® There can be little doubt that the hairs thus 
scattered over the body are the rudiments of the uniform 
hairy coat of the lower animals. This view is rendered 
all the more probable, as it is known that fine, short, and 
pale-coloured hairs on the limbs and other parts of the 
body, occasionally become developed into “ thickset, 
long, and rather coarse dark hairs,” when abnormally 
nourished near old-standing inflamed surfaces.^® 

I am informed by Sir James Paget that often several 
members of a family have a few hairs in their eyebrows 
much longer than the others ; so that even this slight 
peculiarity seems to be inherited. These hairs, too, 
seem to have their representatives ; for in the chim- 
panzee, and in certain species of Macacus, there are 

‘The Physiology and Pa- fiir Anat. und Phys.’ 1837, s. 
thtlogy of Mind,’ 2nd edit. 47. I shall often have to refer 
1868, p. 134. to this very curious paper. 

Eschricht, Ueber die Rich- Paget, ‘ Lectures on Siirgi- 

tung der Haare am mensch- cal Pathology,’ 1853, vol. i. p. 
lichen Korper, ‘ Miiller’s Archiv 71. 


Chap. I. 


KUDIMENTS. 


27 


scattered hairs of considerable length rising from the 
naked skin above the eyes, and corresponding to our 
eyebrows ; similar long hairs project from the hairy 
covering of the superciliary ridges in some baboons. 

The fine wool-like hair, or so-called lanugo, with 
which the human foetus during the sixth month is 
thickly covered, offers a more curious case. It is first 
developed, during the fifth month, on the eyebrows 
and face, and especially round the mouth, where it is 
much longer than that on the head. A moustache of 
this kind was observed by Eschricht^® on a female 
foetus ; but this is not so surprising a circumstance as 
it may at first appear, for the two sexes generally 
resemble each other in all external characters during 
an early period of growth. The direction and arrange- 
ment of the hairs on all parts of the foetal body are 
the same as in the adult, but are subject to much 
variability. The whole surface, including even the 
forehead and ears, is thus thickly clothed ; but it is 
a significant fact that the palms of the hands and the 
soles of the feet are quite naked, like the inferior 
surfaces of all four extremities in most of the lower 
animals. As this can hardly be an accidental 
coincidence, the woolly covering of the foetus probably 
represents the first permanent coat of hair in those 
mammals which are horn hairy. Three or four cases 
have been recorded of persons born with their whole 
bodies and faces thickly covered with fine long hairs ; 
and this strange condition is strongly inherited, and is 
correlated with an abnormal condition of the teeth.^^ 

Eschricht, ibid. s. 40, 47. cation,’ vol. ii. p. 327. Prof. 

See my ‘ Variation of Ani- Alex. Brandt has recently sent 
mals and Plants under Domesti- me an additional case of a father 


28 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


Prof. Alex. Brandt informs me tliat he has compared 
the hair from the face of a man thus characterised, 
aged thirty-five, with the lanugo of a foetus, and finds 
it quite similar in texture ; therefore, as he remarks, 
the case may be attributed to an arrest of development 
in the hair, together with its continued growth. 
Many delicate children, as I have been assured by a 
surgeon to a hospital for children, have their backs 
covered by rather long silky hairs ; and such cases 
probably come under the same head. 

It appears as if the posterior molar or wisdom-teeth 
were tending to become rudimentary in the more 
civilised races of man. These teeth are rather smaller 
than the other molars, as is likewise the case with the 
corresponding teeth in the chimpanzee and orang ; 
and they have only two separate fangs. They do not 
cut through the gums till about the seventeenth year, 
and I have been assured that they are much more 
liable to decay, and are earlier lost than the other 
teeth ; but this is denied by some eminent dentists. 
They are also much more liable to vary, both in 
structure, and in the period of their development, than 
the other teeth.'*^ In the Melanian races, on the other 
hand, the wisdom-teeth are usually furnished with 
three separate fangs, and are generally sound; they 
also difier from the other molars in size, less than in 
the Caucasian races.^^ Prof. Schaaffhausen accounts 


and son, born in Russia, with 
these peculiarities. I have re- 
ceived drawings of both from 
Paris. 

^2 Dr. Webb, ‘ Teeth in Man 
and the Anthropoid Apes,’ as 


quoted by Dr. C. Carter Blake 
in ‘ Anthropological Review,’ 
July 1867, p. 299. 

Owen, * Anatomy of Verte- 
brates,’ vol. iii. pp. 320, 321, and 
325. 


Chap. I. 


RUDIMENTS. 


29 


for this difference between the races by ‘‘ the posterior 
dental portion of the jaw being always shortened ” in 
those that are civilised/^ and this shortening may, I 
presume, be attributed to civilised men habitually 
feeding on soft, cooked food, and thus using their jaws 
less. I am informed by Mr. Brace that it is becoming 
quite a common practice in the United States to 
remove some of the molar teeth of children, as the jaw 
does not grow large enough for the perfect develop- 
ment of the normal number.^” 

With respect to the alimentary canal, I have met 
with an account of only a single rudiment, namely the 
vermiform appendage of the csecum. The caecum is a 
branch or diverticulum of the intestine, ending in a 
cul-de-sac, and is extremely long in many of the lower 
vegetable-feeding mammals. In the marsupial koala 
it is actually more than thrice as long as the whole 
body.'^® It is sometimes produced into a long gradually- 
tapering point, and is sometimes constricted in parts. 
It appears as if, in consequence of changed diet or 
habits, the caecum had become much shortened in 
various animals, the vermiform appendage being left 
as a rudiment of the shortened part. That this 
appendage is a rudiment, we may infer from its small 
size, and from the evidence which Prof. Canestrini^^ 
has collected of its variability in man. It is occasion- 


^ ‘ On the Primitive Form of 
the Skull,’ Eng. translat. in 
‘Anthropological Review,’ Oct. 
1868, p. 420. 

Prof. Montegazza writes to 
me from Florence, that he has 
lately been studying the last 
molar teeth in the different 
races of man, and has come to 


the same conclusion as that 
given in my text, viz., that in 
the higher or civilised races 
they are on the road towards 
atrophy or elimination. 

Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Verte- 
brates,’ vol, iii. pp. 416, 434, 441. 

‘Annjario della Soc. d. 
Nat.’ Modena, 1867, p. 94. 


80 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part I. 

ally quite absent, or again is largely developed. The 
passage is sometimes completely closed for half or 
two-thirds of its length, with the terminal part con- 
sisting of a flattened solid expansion. In the orang 
this appendage is long and convoluted : in man it 
arises from the end of the short caecum, and is 
commonly from four to five inches in length, being 
only about the third of an inch in diameter. Not only 
is it useless, but it is sometimes the cause of death, of 
which fact I have lately heard ^two instances : this is 
due to small hard bodies, such as seeds, entering the 
passage, and causing inflammation.'^® 

In some of the lower Quadrumana, in the Lemuridae 
and Carnivora, as well as in many marsupials, there is 
a passage near the lower end of the humerus, called 
the supra-condyloid foramen, through which the great 
nerve of the fore limb and often the great artery pass. 
Now in the humerus of man, there is generally a trace 
of this passage, which is sometimes fairly well deve- 
loped, being formed by a depending hook-like process 
of bone, completed by a band of ligament. Dr. 
Struthers,^® who has closely attended to the subject, 
has now shewn that this peculiarity is sometimes 
inherited, as it has occurred in a father, and in no less 


M. C. Martins (“De I’Unite 
Orgauique,” in ‘ Revue des 
Deux Mondes,’ June 15, 1862, 
p. 16), and Hackel (‘ Generelle 
Morphologie,’ B. ii. s. 278), 
have both remarked on the 
singular fact of this rudiment 
sometimes causing death. 

With respect to inlieri- 
taiice, sec Dr. Struthers in the 
‘ Lancet,’ Fob. 16, 1873, and 
another important paper, ibid.. 


Jan. 24, 1863, p. 83. Dr. 
Knox, as I am informed, was 
the first anatomist who drew 
attention to this peculiar struc- 
ture in man ; see his ‘ Great 
Artists aud Anatomists,’ p. 63. 
See also an important memoir 
on this process by Dr. Gruber, 
in the ‘ Bulletin de I’Acad. Imp. 
de St. Petersbourg,’ tom. xii. 
1867, p. 448. 


Chap. I. 


RUDIMENTS. 


31 


than four out of his seven children. When present, 
the great nerve invariably passes through it ; and this 
clearly indicates that it is the homologue and rudiment 
of the supra-condyloid foramen of the lower animals. 
Prof. Turner estimates, as he informs me, that it 
occurs in about one per cent, of recent skeletons. But 
if the occasional development of this structure in man 
is, as seems probable, due to reversion, it is a return 
to a very ancient state of things, because in the higher 
Quadrumana it is absent. 

There is another foramen or perforation in the 
humerus, occasionally present in man, which may be 
called the inter-condyloid. This occurs, but not 
constantly, in various anthropoid and other apes,^° 
and likewise in many of the lower animals. It is 
remarkable that this perforation seems to have been 
present in man much more frequently during ancient 
times than recently. Mr. Busk^^ has collected the 
follovring evidence on this head : Prof. Broca “ noticed 
“ the perforation in four and a half per cent, of the 
“ arm-bones collected in the ‘ Cimetiere du Sud,’ at 
“ Paris ; and in the Grrotto of Orrony, the contents of 
“ which are referred to the Bronze period, as many as 
“ eight humeri out of thirty-two were perforated ; but 
“ this extraordinary proportion, he thinks, might be 
“ due to the cavern having been a sort of ‘ family 
“ vault.’ Again, M. Dupont found thirty per cent. 

Mr. St. George Mivart, (Fourth Annual Report, Pta- 

‘ Transact. Pliil. Soc.’ 1867, p. bofly Museum, 1871, p. 20), 

310. that this perforation is present 

“On the Caves of Gib- in thirty-one per cent, of some 

raltar,” ‘ Tansact. Internal. Con- human remains from ancient 

gress of Prehist. Arch.’ Third mounds in the Western United 

Session, 1869, p. 159. Prof. States, and in Florida. It 

Wyman has lately shewn freLp.iently occurs in the negro. 


32 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


“ of perforated bones in the caves of the Valley of 
“ the Lesse, belonging to the Keindeer period ; whilst 
M. Leguay, in a sort of dolmen at Argenteuil, observed 
twenty-five per cent, to be perforated ; and M. 
“ Pruner-Bey found twenty-six per cent, in the same 
“ condition in bones from Yaureal. Nor should it 
“ be left unnoticed that M. Pruner-Bey states that 
'‘this condition is common in Guanche skeletons.” 
It is an interesting fact that ancient races, in 
this and several other cases, more frequently present 
structures which resemble those of the lower animals 
than do the modern. One chief cause seems to be 
that the ancient races stand somewhat nearer in 
the long line of descent to their remote animal-like 
progenitors. 

In man, the os coccyx, together with certain other 
vertebrae hereafter to be described, though function- 
less as a tail, plainly represent this part in other 
vertebrate animals. At an early embryonic period it 
is free, and projects beyond the lower extremities ; as 
may be seen in the drawing (Fig. 1.) of a human 
embryo. Even after birth it has been known, in 
certain rare and anomalous cases,®^ to form a small 
external rudiment of a tail. The os coccyx is short, 
usually including only four vertebrae, all anchylosed 
together : and these are in a rudimentary condition, 
for they consist, with the exception of the basal one, 

Quatrefages has lately col- bodies ; and this tail was criti- 
lected the evidence on this cally examined by the many 
subject. ‘ Revue des Cours anatomists present at the meet- 
Scientifiques,’ 1867-1868, p. ing of naturalists at Erlangen 
625. In 1840 Fleischmann ex- (see Marshall in Niederlandi- 
hibited a human foetus bearing a schen Archiv fiir Zoologie,, 
free tail, which, as is not always December 1871). 
the case, included vertebral 


Chap. L 


RUDIMENTS. 


33 


of the centrum alone.®^ They are furnished with some 
small muscles ; one of which, as I am informed by Prof. 
Tamer, has been expressly described by Theile as a 
rudimentary repetition of the extensor of the tail, a 
muscle which is so largely developed in many mammals. 

The spinal cord in man extends only as far down- 
wards as the last dorsal or first lumbar vertebra ; but 
a thread-like structure (the Jllum terminale) runs down 
the axis of the sacral part of the spinal canal, and even 
along the back of the coccygeal bones. The upper 
part of this filament, as Prof. Turner informs me, is 
undoubtedly homologous with the spinal cord ; but the 
lower part apparently consists merely of the pia mater ^ 
or vascular investing membrane. Even in this case 
the os coccyx may be said to possess a vestige of so 
important a structure as the spinal cord, though no 
longer enclosed within a bony canal. The following 
fact, for which I am also indebted to Prof. Turner, 
shews how closely the os coccyx corresponds with the 
true tail in the lower animals : Luschka has recently 
discovered at the extremity of the coccygeal bones a 
very peculiar convoluted body, which is continuous 
with the middle sacral artery ; and this discovery led 
Krause and Meyer to examine the tail of a monkey 
(Macacus), and of a cat, in both of which they found 
a similarly convoluted body, though not at the ex- 
tremity. 

The reproductive system offers various rudimentary 
structures ; but these differ in one important respect 
from the foregoing cases. Here we are not concerned 
with the vestige of a part which does not belong to 
the species in an efficient state, but with a part 
“ Owen, ‘ On the Nature of Limbs,’ 1849, p. 114. 


34 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


efficient in the one sex, and represented in the other 
by a mere rudiment. Nevertheless, the occurrence of 
such rudiments is as difficult to explain, on the belief 
of the separate creation of each species, as in the fore- 
' going cases. Hereafter I shall have to recur to these 
rudiments, and shall shew that their presence generally 
depends merely on inheritance, that is, on parts 
acquired by one sex having been partially transmitted 
to the other. I will in this place only give some 
instances of such rudiments. It is well known that 
in the males of all mammals, including man, rudi- 
mentary mammae exist. These in several instances 
have become well developed, and have yielded a copious 
supply of milk. Their essential identity in the two 
sexes is likewise shewn by their occasional sympathetic 
enlargement in both during an attack of the measles. 
The vesicula prostatica, which has been observed in 
many male mammals, is now universally acknowledged 
to he the homologue of the female uterus, together 
with the connected passage. It is impossible to read 
Leuckart’s able description of this organ, and his 
reasoning, without admitting the justness of his 
conclusion. This is especially clear in the case of 
those mammals in which the true female uterus 
bifurcates, for in the males of these the vesicula like- 
wise hifurcates.^^ Some other rudimentary structures 
belonging to the reproductive system might have been 
here adduced.^® 

Leuckart, in Todd’s ‘Cyclop. in development as well as in 
of Anat.’ 1849-52, vol. iv. p. other characters. 

1415. In man this oigan is “ See, on this subject, Owen, 
only from three to six lines in ‘ Anatomy of Vertebrates,* vol. 
length, but, like so many other iii. pp. 676, 676, 706. 
rudimentary parts, it is variable 


Chap. I. 


RUDIMENTS. 


85 


The bearing of the three great classes of facts now 
given is unmistakeable. But it would be superfluous 
fully to recapitulate the line of argument given in 
detail in my ‘ Origin of Species.* The homological 
construction of the whole frame in the members of the 
same class is intelligible, if we admit their descent 
from a common progenitor, together with their sub- 
sequent adaptation to diversified conditions. On any 
other view, the similarity of pattern between the hand 
of a man or monkey, the foot of a horse, the flipper of 
a seal, the wing of a bat, &c., is utterly inexplicable.®® 
It is no scientific explanation to assert that they have 
all been formed on the same ideal plan. With respect 
to development, we can clearly understand, on the 
principle of variations supervening at a rather late 


“ Prof. Bianconi, in a recently 
published work, illustrated by 
admirable engravings (‘ La 
Theorie Darwinienne et la crea- 
tion dite independante,’ 1874), 
endeavours to show that homo- 
logical structures, in the above 
and other cases, can be fully 
explained on mechanical prin- 
ciples, in accordance with their 
uses. No one has shown so 
well, how admirably such struc- 
tures are adapted for their final 
purpose ; and this adaptation 
can, as I believe, be explained 
through natural selection. In 
considering the wing of a bat, 
he brings forward (p. 218) what 
appears to me (to use Auguste 
Comte’s words) a mere meta- 
physical principle, namely, the 
preservation “ in its integrity of 
“ the mammalian nature of the 
“ animal.” In only a few cases 


does he discuss rudiments, and 
then only those parts which are 
partially rudimentary, such as 
the little hoofs of the pig and 
ox, which do not touch the 
ground ; these he shews clearly 
to be of service to the animal. 
It is unfortunate that he did not 
consider such cases as the 
mmute teeth, which never cut 
through the jaw in the ox, or 
the mammse of male quadrupeds, 
or the wings of certain beetles, 
existing under the soldered 
wing-covers, or the vestiges of 
the pistil and stamens in various 
flowers, and many other such 
cases. Although I greatly 
admire Prof. Bianconi’s work, 
yet the belief now held by most 
naturalists seems to me left 
imshaken, that homological 
structures are inexplicahle on 
the principle of mere adaptation. 


36 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


embryonic period, and being inherited at a corre- 
sponding period, how it is that the embryos of wonder- 
fully different forms should still retain, more or less 
perfectly, the structure of their common progenitor. 
No other explanation has ever been given of the 
marvellous fact that the embryos of a man, dog, seal, 
bat, reptile, &c., can at first hardly be distinguished 
from each other. In order to understand the existence 
of rudimentary organs, we have only to suppose that 
a former progenitor possessed the parts in question in 
a perfect state, and that under changed habits of life 
they became greatly reduced, either from simple 
disuse, or through the natural selection of those 
individuals which were least encumbered with a 
superfluous part, aided by the other means previously 
indicated. 

Thus we can understand how it has come to pass that 
man and all other vertebrate animals have been con- 
structed on the same general model, why they pass 
through the same early stages of development, and 
why they retain certain rudiments in common. Con- 
sequently we ought frankly to admit their community 
of descent ; to take any other view, is to admit that 
our own structure, and that of all the animals around 
us, is a mere snare laid to entrap our judgment. This 
conclusion is greatly strengthened, if we look to the 
members of the whole animal series, and consider the 
evidence derived from their affinities or classification, 
their geographical distribution and geological suc- 
cession. It is only our natural prejudice, and that 
arrogance which made our forefathers declare that 
they were descended from demi-gods, which leads us 


Chap. 1. 


RUDIMENTS. 


37 


to demur to this conclusion. But the time will before 
long come, when it will be thought wonderful that 
naturalists, who were well acquainted with the com- 
parative structure and development of man, and other 
mammals, should have believed that each was the 
work of a separate act of creation. 


38 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt L 


CHAPTEK II. 

On the Manneb op Development op Man prom 
SOME Lower Form. 

Variability of body and mind in man — Inheritance — Causes of 
variability — Laws of variation the same in man as in the lower 
animals — Direct action of the conditions of life — Effects of the 
increased use and disuse of parts — Arrested development — 
Keversion — Correlated variation — Bate of increase — Checks to 
increase — Natural selection — Man the most dominant animal in 
the world — Importance of his coporeal structure — The causes 
which have led to his becoming erect — Consequent changes of 
structure — Decrease in size of the canine teeth — Increased size 
and altered shape of the skull — Nakedness — Absence of a tail— 
Defenceless condition of man. 

It is manifest that man is now subject to much 
variability. No two individuals of the same race are 
quite alike. We may compare millions of faces, and 
each will be distinct. There is an equally great 
amount of diversity in the proportions and dimensions 
of the various parts of the body ; the length of the 
legs being one of the most variable points.^ Although 
in some quarters of the world an elongated skull, and 
in other quarters a short skull prevails, yet there is 
great diversity of shape even within the limits of the 
same race, as with the aborigines of America and 
South Australia — the latter a race probably as pure 
“ and homogeneous in blood, customs, and language as 

* ‘Investigations in Military American Soldiers,’ by B. A 
and Anthropolog. Statistics of Gould, 1869, p. 256. 


Chap. II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


39 


‘‘any in existence” — and even with the inhabitants 
of so confined an area as the Sandwich Islands.^ An 
eminent dentist assures me that there is nearly as 
much diversity in the teeth as in the features. The 
chief arteries so frequently run in abnormal courses, 
that it has been found useful for surgical purposes to 
calculate from 1040 corpses how often each course 
prevails.^ The muscles are eminently variable : thus 
those of the foot were found by* Prof. Turner ^ not to 
be strictly alike in any two out of fifty bodies ; and in 
some the deviations were considerable. He adds, that 
the power of performing the appropriate movements 
must have been modified in accordance with the 
several deviations. Mr. J. Wood has recorded® the 
occurrence of 295 muscular variations in thirty-six 
subjects, and in another set of the same number no 
less than 558 variations, those occurring on both sides 
of the body being only reckoned as one. In the last 
set, not one body out of the thirty-six was “ found 
“ totally wanting in departures from the standard 
“descriptions of the muscular system given in ana- 
“tomical text books.” A single body presented the 
extraordinary number of twenty-five distinct ab- 
normalities. The same muscle sometimes varies in 
many ways: thus Prof. Macalister describes® no less 


^ With respect to the “ Cranial 
forms of the American abori- 
gines,” see Dr. Aitken Meigs in 
‘ Proc, Acad. Nat. Sci.' Phila- 
delphia, May, 1868. On the 
Australians, see Huxley, in 
Lyell’s ‘ Antiquity of Man,’ 
1863, p. 87. On the Sandwich 
Islanders, Prof. J. Wyman, 
‘Observations on Crania,’ Boston, 
1868. n. 18. 


* * Anatomy of the Arteries,’ 
by R. Quain. Preface, vol. i. 
1844. 

* ‘ Transact. Royal Soc. Edin- 
burgh,’ vol. xxiv. pp. 175, 189. 

® ‘ Proc. Royal Soc.’ 1867, 
p. 544 ; also 1868, pp. 483, 524. 
There is a previous paper, 1866, 
p. 229. 

* ‘Proc. R. Irish Academy,’ 
vol. X. 1868, n. 141. 


40 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part 1 . 

than twenty distinct variations in the 'palmaris ac- 
cessorius. 

The famous old anatomist, Wolff,’ insists that the 
internal viscera are more variable than the external 
parts : Nulla particula est quw non aliter et aliter in 
aliis se habeat hominibus. He has even written a 
treatise on the choice of typical examples of the 
viscera for representation. A discussion on the beau- 
ideal of the liver, lungs, kidneys, &c., as of the human 
face divine, sounds strange in our ears. 

The variability or diversity of the mental faculties 
in men of the same race, not to mention the greater 
differences between the men of distinct races, is so 
notorious that not a word need here be said. So it is 
with the lower animals. All who have had charge of 
menageries admit this fact, and we see it plainly 
in our dogs and other domestic animals. Brehm 

especially insists that each individual monkey of those 
which he kept tame in Africa had its own peculiar 
disposition and temper: he mentions one baboon 
remarkable for its high intelligence ; and the keepers 
in the Zoological Gardens pointed out to me a monkey, 
belonging to the New World division, equally remark- 
able for intelligence. Eengger, also, insists on the 
diversity in the various mental characters of the 
monkeys of the same species which he kept in 
Paraguay; and this diversity, as he adds, is partly 
innate, and partly the result of the manner in which 
they have been treated or educated.® 

I have elsewhere ® so fully discussed the subject of 

’’ ‘ Act. Acad. St. Petersburg,’ von Paraguay,’ s. 57. 

1778, part ii. p. 217. * ‘ Variation of Animals and 

* Brebm, ‘ Tbierleben,’ B. i. s. Plants under Domestication,' 
58i 87. Rengger, ‘ Saugetbiere vol. ii. chap. xii. 


Chap. II. 


MANNEK OE DEVELOPMENT. 


41 


Inheritance, that I need here add hardly anything. A 
greater number of facts have been collected with respect 
to the transmission of the most trifling, as well as of 
the most important characters in man, than in any of 
the lower animals; though the facts are copious 
enough with respect to the latter. So in regard to 
mental qualities, their transmission is manifest in our 
dogs, horses, and other domestic animals. Besides 
special tastes and habits, general intelligence, courage, 
bad and good temper, &c., are certainly transmitted. 
With man we see similar facts in almost every family ; 
and we now know, through the admirable labours of Mr. 
Ga]ton,^° that genius which implies a wonderfully com- 
plex combination of high faculties, tends to be in- 
herited ; and, on the other hand, it is too certain that 
insanity and deteriorated mental powers likewise run 
in families. 

With respect to the causes of variability, we are in 
all cases very ignorant ; but we can see that in man as 
in the lower animals, they stand in some relation to 
the conditions to which each species has been exposed, 
during several generations. Domesticated animals 
vary more than those in a state of nature ; and this 
is apparently due to the diversified and changing 
nature of the conditions to which they have been 
subjected. In this respect the different races of man 
resemble domesticated animals, and so do the in- 
dividuals of the same race, when inhabiting a very 
wide area, like that of America. We see the influence 
of diversified conditions in the more civilised nations ; 
for the members belonging to different grades of rank, 

‘ Hereditary Genius : an Inquiry into its Laws and Conse- 
quences,’ 1869. 


42 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past L 


and following different occupations, present a greater 
range of character than do the members of barbarous 
nations. But the uniformity of savages has often 
been exaggerated, and in some cases can hardly be 
said to exist.“ It is, nevertheless, an error to speak 
of man, even if we look only to the conditions to 
which he has been exposed, as ‘‘far more domesti- 
“ cated ” than any other animal. Some savage races, 
such as the Australians, are not exposed to more 
diversified conditions than are many species which 
have a wide range. In another and much more 
important respect, man differs widely from any strictly 
domesticated animal ; for his breeding has never long 
been controlled, either by methodical or unconscious 
selection. No race or body of men has been so com- 
pletely subjugated by other men, as that certain 
individuals should be preserved, and thus unconsciously 
selected, from somehow excelling in utility to their 
masters. Nor have certain male and female individuals 
been intentionally picked out and matched, except in 
the well-known case of the Prussian grenadiers; and 
in this case man obeyed, as might have been expected, 
the law of methodical selection ; for it is asserted that 
many tall men were reared in the villages inhabited 
by the grenadiers and their tall wives. In Sparta, 
also, a form of selection was followed, for it was 
enacted that all children should be examined shortly 


“ Mr. Bates remarks (‘ The 
Naturalist on the Amazons,’ 
1863, vol. ii. p. 159), with re- 
spect to the Indians of the same 
South American tribe, “^no two 
“ of them were at all similar in 
“the’ shape of the head; one 
“ man had an oval visage with 


“ fine features, and another was 
“ quite Mongolian in breadth 
“ and prominence of check, 
“spread of nostrils, and obli- 
“ quity of eyes.” 

Blumenbach, ‘ Treatises on 
Anthropolog.’ Eng. translat., 
1865, p. 205. 


Ohap. n. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


43 


after birth ; the well-formed and vigorous being 
preserved, the others left to perish. 

If we consider all the races of man as forming a 
single species, his range is enormous; but some 
separate races, as the Americans and Polynesians, 
have very wide ranges. It is a well-known law that 
widely-ranging species are much more variable than 
species with restricted ranges ; and the variability of * 
man may with more truth be compared with that of 
widely-ranging species, than with that of domesticated 
animals. 

Not only does variability appear to be induced in 
man and the lower animals by the same general causes, 
but in both the same parts of the body are affected in 
a closely analogous manner. This has been proved in 


“ Mitford’s ‘ History of 
Greece,’ vol. i. p. 282. It 
appears also from a passage in 
Xenophon’s ‘ Memorabilia,’ B. 
ii. 4 (to which my attention has 
been called by the Rev. J. N. 
Hoare), that it was a w^ell 
recognised principle with the 
Greeks, that men ought to 
select their wives with a view 


to the health and vigour of 
their children. The Grecian 
poet, Theognis, who lived 550 
B.C., clearly saw how important 
selection, if carefully applied, 
would be for the improvement 
of mankind. He saw, likewise, 
that wealth often checks the 
proper action of sexual selection. 
He thus writes : 


“ With kine and horses, Kurnus ! we proceed 
By reasonable rules, and choose a breed 
For profit and increase, at any price ; 

Of a sound stock, without defect or vice. 

But, in the daily matches that we make. 

The price is everything : for money’s sake, 

Men marry : women are in marriage given 
The churl or ruffian, that in wealth has thriven, 
May match his ofispi ing with the proudest race : 
Thus everything is mix’d, noble and base 1 
If then in outward manner, form, and mind, 

You find us a degraded, motley kind, 

Wonder no more, my friend 1 the cause is plain. 
And to lament the consequence is vain.” 

(The works of J. Hookham Frere, vol. ii. 1872, p. 334.) 


44 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


such full detail by Grodron and Quatrefages, that I 
need here only refer to their works.^^ Monstrosities, 
which graduate into slight variations, are likewise so 
similar in man and the lower animals, that the same 
classification and the same terms can be used for both, 
as has been shewn by Isidore Geoflfroy St. -Hilaire.^® 
In my work on the variation of domestic animals, I 
• have attempted to arrange in a rude fashion the laws 
of variation under the following heads: — The direct 
and definite action of changed conditions, as exhibited 
by all or nearly all the individuals of the same species, 
varying in the same manner under the same circum- 
stances. The efiects of the long- continued use or 
disuse of parts. The cohesion of homologous parts. 
The variability of multiple parts. Compensation of 
growth ; but of this law I have found no good instance 
in the case of man. The effects of the mechanical 
pressure of one part on another ; as of the pelvis on 
the cranium of the infant in the womb. Arrests of 
development, leading to the diminution or suppression 
of parts. The reappearance of long-lost characters 
through reversion. And lastly, correlated variation. 
All these so-called laws apply equally to man and the 
lower animals ; and most of them even to plants. It 
would be superfluous here to discuss all of them but 


Godron, ‘ De I’Espece,’ 1859, 
tom. ii. livre 3. Quatrefages, 
‘Unit4 de I’Espece Humaine,’ 
1861. Also Lectures on An- 
thropology, given in the ‘ Kevue 
des Cours Scientifiques,’ 1866- 
1868. 

“ ‘ Hist. G^n.et Part, des Ano- 
malies de rOrganisation,’ in three 
volumes, tom. i. 1832. 


I have fully discussed these 
laws in my ‘ Variation of Ani- 
mals and Plants under Domesti- 
cation,’ vol. ii. chap. xxii. and 
xxiii. M. J. P. Durand has 
lately (1868) published a valu- 
able essay ‘De I’lnfluence des 
Milieux,’ &c. He lays much 
stress, in the case of plants, on 
the nature of the soil. 


Chap. II. MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 45 

several are so important, that they must be treated 
at considerable length. 

The direct and definite action of changed conditions , — 
This is a most perplexing subject. It cannot be denied 
that changed conditions produce some, and occasionally 
a considerable effect, on organisms of all kinds ; and it 
seems at first probable that if sufficient time were 
allowed this would be the invariable result. But I 
have failed to obtain clear evidence in favour of this 
conclusion; and valid reasons may be urged on the 
other side, at least as far as the innumerable structures 
are concerned, which are adapted for special ends. There 
can, however, be no doubt that changed conditions 
induce an almost indefinite amount of fluctuating 
variability, by which the whole organisation is ren- 
dered in some degree plastic. 

In the United States, above 1,000,000 soldiers, who 
served in the late war, were measured, and the States 
in which they were born and reared were recorded.^’ 
From this astonishing number of observations it is 
proved that local influences of some kind act directly 
on stature ; and we further learn that “ the State 
“ where the physical growth has in great measure 
“ taken place, and the State of birth, which indicates 
“ the ancestry, seem to exert a marked influence on 

the stature.” For instance, it is established, “ that 

residence in the Western States, during the years of 
“ growth, tends to produce increase of stature.” On 
the other hand, it is certain that with sailors, their 
life delays growth, as shewn ‘‘ by the great difference 
“ between the statures of soldiers and sailors at the 

” ‘ Investigations in Military 1869, by B. A. Gould, p. 93, 107, 
and Autbrop. Statistics,’ &c. 126, 131, 134. 


46 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


** ages of seventeen and eighteen years.” Mr. B. A. 
Gould endeavoured to ascertain the nature of the 
influences which thus act on stature ; hut he arrived 
only at negative results, namely, that they did not 
relate to climate, the elevation of the land, soil, nor 
even in any controlling degree ” to the abundance or 
the need of the comforts of life. This latter conclusion 
is directly opposed to that arrived at by Yillerme, from 
the statistics of the height of the conscripts in different 
parts of France. When we compare the differences in 
stature between the Polynesian chiefs and the lower 
orders within the same islands, or between the in- 
habitants of the fertile volcanic and low barren coral 
islands of the same ocean,^® or again between the 
Fuegians on the eastern and western shores of their 
country, where the means of subsistence are very 
different, it is scarcely possible to avoid the conclusion 
that better food and greater comfort do influence 
stature. But the preceding statements shew how 
difficult it is to arrive at, any precise result. Dr. 
Beddoe has lately proved that, with the inhabitants of 
Britain, residence in towns and certain occupations 
have a deteriorating influence on height ; and he infers 
that the result is to a certain extent inherited, as is 
likewise the case in the United States. Dr. Beddoe 
further believes that wherever a “race attains its 
“ maximum of physical development, it rises highest in 
“ energy and moral vigour.” 

For the Polynesians, see allied Hindoos inhabiting the 
Prichard’s * Physical Hist of Upper Ganges and Bengal ; see 
Mankind,’ vol. v. 1847, p. 145, Elphinstone’s ‘ History of India,’ 
283. Also Godron, ‘Del’Espece,’ vol. i. p. 324. 
tom. ii. p. 289. There is also Memoirs, Anthropolog.Soc.* 

a remarkable difference in ap- vol. iii. 1867-69, pp. 561, 565, 
pearance between the closely- 567. 


Chap. II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


47 


Whether external conditions produce any other direct 
effect on man is not known. It might have been ex- 
pected that differences of climate would have had a 
marked influence, inasmuch as the lungs and kidneys 
ure brought into activity under a low temperature, 
xnd the liver and skin under a high one.^° It was 
formerly thought that the colour of the skin and the 
character of the hair were determined by light or 
heat ; and although it can hardly be denied that some 
effect is thus produced, almost all observers now agree 
that the effect has been very small, even after exposure 
during many ages. But this subject will be more 
properly discussed when we treat of the different races 
of mankind. With our domestic animals there are 
grounds for believing that cold and damp directly 
affect the growth of the hair ; but I have not met with 
any evidence oh this head in the case of man. 

Effects of the increased Use and Disuse of Parts . — 
It is well known that use strengthens the muscles in 
the individual, and complete disuse, or the destruction 
of the proper nerve, weakens them. When the eye is 
destroyed, the optic nerve often becomes atrophied. 
When an artery is tied, the lateral channels increase 
not only in diameter, but in the thickness and strength 
of their coats. When one kidney ceases to act from 
disease, the other increases in size, and does double 
work. Bones increase not only in thickness, but in 
length, from carrying a greater weight.^^ Different 

“ Dr. Brakenridge, ‘ Theory ^ ^ mestication,’ vol. ii. pp. 297-300. 
Diathesis,’ ‘Medical Times,’ June Dr. Jaeger, “ Ueber das Lan- 
19 and July 17, 1869. genwachsthum der Knochen,” 

^ I have given authorities for ‘ Jenaischen Zeitschrift,’ B- v, 

these several statements in my Heft. i. 

‘ Variation of Animals under Do- 


48 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Part I. 


occupations, habitually followed, lead to changed pro- 
portions in various parts of the body. Thus it was 
ascertained by the United States Commissions^ that 
the legs of the sailors employed in the late war were 
longer by 0*217 of an inch than those of the soldiers, 
though the sailors were on an average shorter men ; 
whilst their arms were shorter by 1*09 of an inch, and 
therefore, out of proportion, shorter in relation to their 
lesser height. This shortness of the arms is apparently 
due to their greater use, and is an unexpected result : 
but sailors chiefly use their arms in pulling, and not 
in supporting weights. With sailors, the girth of the 
neck and the depth of the instep are greater, whilst 
the circumference of the chest, waist, and hips is less, 
than in soldiers. 

Whether the several foregoing modifications would 
become hereditary, if the same habits of life were fol- 
lowed during many generations, is not known, but it is 
probable. Eengger^^ attributes the thin legs and thick 
arms of the Payaguas Indians to successive generations 
having passed nearly their whole lives in canoes, with 
their lower extremities motionless. Other writers have 
come to a similar conclusion in analogous cases. Ac- 
cording to Cranz,^^ who lived for a long time with the 
Esquimaux, ‘‘the natives believe that ingenuity and 
“ dexterity in seal- catching (their highest art and 
“ virtue) is hereditary ; there is really something in it, 
“ for the son of a celebrated seal-catcher will distinguish 
“ himself, though he lost his father in childhood.” But 
in this case it is mental aptitude, quite as much as 

22 ‘ Investigations,’ &c. By B. 1830, s. 4. 

A. Gould, 1869, p. 288. 24 < History of Greenland,’ Eng, 

® ‘ Baugethiere von Paraguay,’ translat. 1767, vol. i. p. 230, 


Chap. II. 


MANNED OF DEVELOPMENT. 


49 


bodily structure, which appears to he inherited. It is 
asserted that the hands of English labourers are at 
birth larger than those of the gentry.^® From the 
correlation which exists, at least in some cases, 
between the development of the extremities and of 
the jaws, it is possible that in those classes which do 
not labour much with their hands and feet, the jaws 
would be reduced in size from this cause. That they 
are generally smaller in refined and civilised men than 
in hard-working men or savages, is certain. But with 
savages, as Mr. Herbert Spencer has remarked, the 
greater use of the jaws in chewing coarse, uncooked 
food, would act in a direct manner on the masticatory 
muscles, and on the bones to which they are attached. 
In infants, long before birth, the skin on the soles of 
the feet is thicker than on any other part of the 
body ; and it can hardly be doubted that this is due 
to the inherited effects of pressure during a long series 
of generations. 

It is familiar to every one that watchmakers and 
engravers are liable to be short-sighted, whilst men 
living much out of doors, and especially savages, are 
generally long-sighted.^® Short-sight and long-sight 
certainly tend to be inherited.^® The inferiority of 


® ‘ Intermarriage.’ By Alex. 
Walker, 1838, p. 377. 

“ ‘ The Variation of Animals 
under Domestication,’ vol. L p. 
173. 

^ ‘ Principles of Biology,’ vol. 
L p. 455. 

“ Paget, ‘ Lectures on Surgical 
Patholo^,’ vol. ii. 1853, p. 209. 

* It is a singular and unex- 
pected fact that sailors are in- 
ferior to landsmen in their mean 


distance of distinct vision. Dr. 
B. A. Gould (‘ Sanitary Memoirs 
of the War of the Rebellion,’ 
1869, p. 530), has proved this 
to be the case ; and he accounts 
for it by the ordinary range of 
vision in sailors being “ restricted 
“ to the length of the vessel and 
“ the height of the masts.” 

^ ‘The Variation of Animals 
under Domestication,’ vol. i. p. 8. 


S 


50 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part L 


Europeans, in comparison with savages, in eyesight and 
in the other senses, is no doubt the accumulated and 
transmitted effect of lessened use during many genera- 
tions; for Eengger"*^ states that he has repeatedly oh< 
served Europeans, who had been brought up and spent 
their whole lives with the wild Indians, who nevertheless 
did not equal them in the sharpness of their senses. 
The same naturalist observes that the cavities in the 
skull for the reception of the several sense-organs are 
larger in the American aborigines than in Europeans ; 
and this probably indicates a corresponding difference 
in the dimensions of the organs themselves. Blumen- 
bach has also remarked on the large size of the nasal 
cavities in the skulls of the American aborigines, and 
connects this fact with their remarkably acute power 
of smell. The Mongolians of the plains of Northern 
Asia, according to Pallas, have wonderfully perfect 
senses ; and Prichard believes that the great breadth 
of their skulls across the zygomas follows from their 
highly-developed sense-organs.^^ 

The Quechua Indians inhabit the lofty plateaux of 
Peru; and Alcide d’Orbigny states that, from con- 
tinually breathing a highly rarefied atmosphere, they 
have acquired chests and lungs of extraordinary 
dimensions. The cells, also, of the lungs are larger 


‘ Saugethiere von Paraguay,’ 
s. 8, 10. I have had good op- 
portunities for observing the ex- 
traordinary power of eyesight in 
the Puegians. See also Lawrence 
(‘Lectures on Physiology,’ &c., 
1822, p. 404) on this same 
subject. M. Giraud-Teulon has 
recently collected (‘ Revue des 
Cours Scientidques,’ 1870, p. 
625) a large and valuable body 


of evidence proving that the 
cause of short-sight, “ (Test le 
travail assiduj de ‘presT 

Prichard, ‘Phys. Hist, of 
Mankind,’ on the authority of 
Blumenbach, voL i. 1851, p. 311; 
for the statement by Pallas, vol. 
iv. 1844, p. 407. 

“ Quoted by Prichard, ‘Re- 
searches into the Phys. Hist, of 
Mankind,’ vol. v. p. 463. 


Ohaf. II. 


MANNER OP DEVELOPMENT. 


51 


and more numerous than in Europeans. These ob- 
servations have been doubted; but Mr. D. Forbes 
carefully measured many Aymaras, an allied race, 
living at the height of between 10,000 and 15,000 
feet; and he informs me^^ that they differ con- 
spicuously from the men of all other races seen by 
him in the circumference and length of their bodies. 
In his table of measurements, the stature of each man 
is taken at 1000, and the other measurements are 
reduced to this standard. It is here seen that the 
extended arms of the Aymaras are shorter than those 
of Europeans, and much shorter than those of Negroes. 
The legs are likewise shorter ; and they present this re- 
markable peculiarity, that in every Aymara measured, 
the femur is actually shorter than the tibia. On an 
average, the length of the femur to that of the tibia 
is as 211 to 252 ; whilst in two Europeans, measured 
at the same time, the femora to the tibiae were as 244 
to 230 ; and in three Negroes as 258 to 241. The 
humerus is likewise shorter relatively to the forearm. 
This shortening of that part of the limb which is 
nearest to the body, appears to be, as suggested to me 
by Mr. Forbes, a case of compensation in relation with 
the greatly increased length of the trunk. The 
Aymaras present some other singular points of structure, 
for instance, the very small projection of the heel. 

These men are so thoroughly acclimatised to their 
cold and lofty abode, that when formerly carried down 
by the Spaniards to the low eastern plains, and when 
now tempted down by high wages to the gold- washings, 

** Mr. Forbes’ valuable paper dou,’ new series, voL ii. 1870, p. 
is now pnblished in tbs ^Journal 193. 
of the Bthnoic^lcal Soc. of Lon- 


$2 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 1. 


they suffer a frightful rate of mortality. Nevertheless 
Mr. Forbes found a few pure families which had sur- 
vived during two generations : and he observed that 
they still inherited their characteristic peculiarities. 
But it was manifest, even without measurement, that 
these peculiarities had all decreased ; and on measure- 
ment, their bodies were found not to be so much 
elongated as those of the men on the high plateau ; 
whilst their femora had become somewhat lengthened, 
as had their tibiae, although in a less degree. The 
actual measurements may be seen by consulting Mr. 
Forbes’s memoir. From these observations, there can, 
I think, be no doubt that residence during many 
generations at a great elevation tends, both directly 
and indirectly, to induce inherited modifications in the 
proportions of the body.^® 

Although man may not have been much modified 
during the latter stages of his existence through the 
increased or decreased use of parts, the facts now given 
shew that his liability in this respect has not been 
lost ; and we positively know that the same law holds 
good with the lower animals. Consequently we may 
infer that when at a remote epoch the progenitors of 
man were in a transitional state, and were changing 
from quadrupeds into bipeds, natural selection would 
probably have been greatly aided by the inherited effects 
of the increased or diminished use of the different parts 
of the body. 

Arrests of Developnent , — There is a difference between 

“ Dr. Wilckens (‘ Landwirth- domestic animals, which live in 
schaft. Wochenblatt,’ No. 10, mountainous regions, have their 
1869) has lately published an frames modified, 
interesting Essay shewing how 


Ohap. n. 


MANNEB OF DEVELOPMENT. 


58 


arrested development and arrested growth, for parts in 
the former state continue to grow whilst still retaining 
their early condition. Various monstrosities come under 
this head ; and some, as a cleft-palate, are known 
to be occasionally inherited. It will suffice for our 
purpose to refer to the arrested brain-development of 
microcephalous idiots, as described in Vogt’s memoir.®® 
Their skulls are smaller, and the convolutions of the 
brain are less complex than in normal men. The 
frontal sinus, or the projection over the eye-brows, is 
largely developed, and the jaws are prognathous to an 
‘‘ effrayant ” degree ; so that these idiots somewhat 
resemble the lower types of mankind. Their in- 
telligence, and most of their mental faculties, are 
extremely feeble. They cannot acquire the power of 
speech, and are wholly incapable of prolonged atten- 
tion, but are much given to imitation. They are 
strong and remarkably active, continually gambolling 
and jumping about, and making grimaces. They often 
ascend stairs on all-fours; and are curiously fond of 
climbing up furniture or trees. We are thus reminded 
of the delight shewn by almost all boys in climbing 
trees ; and this again reminds us how lambs and kids, 
originally alpine animals, delight to frisk on any 
hillock, however small. Idiots also resemble the 
lower animals in some other respects ; thus several 
cases are recorded of their carefully smelling every 
mouthful of food before eating it. One idiot is de- 
scribed as often using his mouth in aid of his hands, 
whilst hunting for lice. They are often filthy in their 
habits, and have no sense of decency ; and several cases 

“ ‘ M^naoire sur les Microc^phales,’ 1867, pp. 60, 125, 169, 171, 
184-198. 


54 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I, 


have been published of their bodies being remarkably 
hairy."’ 

Reversion , — Many of the cases to be here given, 
might have been introduced under the last heading. 
When a structure is arrested in its development, but 
still continues growing, until it closely resembles a 
corresponding structure in some lower and adult 
member of the same group, it may in one sense be 
considered as a case of reversion. The lower members 
in a group give us some idea how the common pro- 
genitor was probably constructed ; and it is hardly 
credible that a complex part, arrested at an early 
phase of embryonic development, should go on growing 
so as ultimately to perform its proper function, unless 
it had acquired such power during some earlier state 
of existence, when the present exceptional or arrested 
structure was normal. The simple brain of a micro- 
cephalous idiot, in as far as it resembles that of an 
ape, may in this sense be said to offer a case of 
reversion."® There are other cases which come more 


^ Prof. Laycock sums up the 
character of brute-like idiots by 
calling them theroid ; ‘Journal 
of Mental Science,’ July, 1863. 
Dr. Scott (‘ The Deaf and Dumb,’ 
2nd edit., 1870, p. 10) has often 
observed the imbecile smelling 
their food. See, on this same 
subject, and on the hairiness of 
idiots. Dr. Maudsley, ‘ Body and 
Mind,’ 1870, pp. 46-51. Pinel 
has also given a striking case of 
hairiness in an idiot. 

In my ‘Variation of Ani- 
mals under Domestication ’ (vol. 
ii. p. 67), I attributed the not 
very rare cases of supernumerary 


mammae in Women to reversion. 
I was led to this as a probable 
conclusion, by the additional 
mammae being generally placed 
symmetrically on the breast; and 
more especially from one case, in 
which a single efficient mamma 
occurred in the inguinal region 
of a woman, the daughter of 
another woman with supernu- 
merary mammae. But I now 
find (see, for instance. Prof. 
Preyer, ‘ Der Kampf um das 
Dasein,’ 1869, s. 45) that mam- 
mce erraticcB occur in other 
situations, as on the back, in 
the armpit, and on the thigh; 


Chap. II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


55 


strictly under our present head of reversion. Certain 
structures, regularly occurring in the lower members 


the mammaB in this latter in- 
stance having given so much 
milk that the child was thus 
nourished. The probability that 
the additional mammae are due 
to reversion is thus much weak- 
ened ; nevertheless, it still seems 
to me probable, because two pairs 
are often found symmetrically on 
the breast ; and of this I myself 
have received information in 
several cases. It is well known 
that some Lemurs normally have 
two pairs of mammse on the 
breast. Five cases have been 
recorded of the presence of more 
than a pair of mammae (of course 
rudimentary) in the male sex of 
mankind ; see ‘ Journal of Anat. 
and Physiology,’ 1872, p. 56, for 
a case given by Dr. Handyside, 
in which two brothers exhibited 
this peculiarity ; see also a paper 
by Dr. Bartels, in ‘Reichert’s 
and du Bois-Reymond’s Archiv.,’ 
1872, p. 304. In one of the cases 
alluded to by Dr. Bartels, a man 
bore five mammae, one being 
medial and placed above the 
navel; Meckel von Hemsbach 
thinks that this latter case is 
illustrated by a medial mamma 
occurring in certain Cheiroptera. 
On the whole, we may well doubt 
if additional mammse would ever 
have been developed in both sexes 
of mankind, had not his early 
progenitors been provided with 
more than a single pair. 

In the above work (voL ii. p. 
12), I also attributed, though 
with much hesitation, the fre- 
quent cases of polydactylism in 
men and various animals to re- 


version. I was partly led to 
this through Prof. Owen’s state- 
ment, that some of the Ichthy- 
opterygia possess more than five 
digits, and therefore, as I sup- 
posed, had retained a primordial 
condition ; but Prof. Gegenbaur 
(‘ Jenaischen Zeitschrift,’ B. v. 
Heft 3, s. 341), disputes Owen’s 
conclusion. On the other hand, 
according to the opinion lately 
advanced by Dr. Gunther, on 
the paddle of Ceratodus, which 
is provided with articulated bony 
rays on both sides of a central 
chain of bones, there seems no 
great difiBculty in admitting that 
six or more digits on one side, 
or on both sides, might reappear 
through reversion. I am in- 
formed by Dr. Zouteveen that 
there is a case on record of a 
man having twenty-four fingers 
and twenty-four toes! I was 
chiefly led to the conclusion that 
the presence of supernumerary 
digits might be due to reversion 
from the fact that such digits, 
not only are strongly inherited, 
but, as I then believed, had the 
power of regrowth after ampu- 
tation, like the normal digits of 
the lower vertebrata. But I 
have explained in the Second 
Edition of my Variation under 
Domestication why I now place 
little reliance on the recorded 
cases of such regrowth. Never- 
theless it deserves notice, inas- 
much as arrested development 
and reversion are intimately re- 
lated processes ; that various 
structures in an embryonic or 
arrested condition, such as a 


56 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


of the group to which man belongs, occasionally make 
their appearance in him, though not found in the 
normal human embryo; or, if normally present in 
the human embryo, they become abnormally developed, 
although in a manner which is normal in the lower 
members of the group. These remarks will be rendered 
clearer by the following illustrations. 

In various mammals the uterus graduates from a 
double organ with two distinct orifices and two 
passages, as in the marsupials, into a single organ, 
which is in no way double except from having a slight 
internal fold, as in the higher apes and man. The 
rodents exhibit a perfect series of gradations between 
these two extreme states. In all mammals the uterus 
is developed from two simple primitive tubes, the 
inferior portions of which form the cornua ; and it is 
in the words of Dr. Farre, “ by the coalescence of the 
“ two cornua at their lower extremities that the body 
‘‘ of the uterus is formed in man ; w^hile in those 
“ animals in which no middle portion or body exists, 
“ the cornua remain ununited. As the development of 
“ the uterus proceeds, the two cornua become gradually 
‘‘ shorter, until at length they are lost, or, as it were, 
“ absorbed into the body of the uterus.” The angles 
of the uterus are still produced into cornua, even in 
animals as high up in the scale as the lower apes and 
lemurs. 

Now in women, anomalous cases are not very infre- 

cleft palate, bifid uterus, &c., course to give up altogether the 
are frequently accompanied by idea that there is any relation 
polydactylism. This has been between the development of su- 
strongly insisted on by Meckel pernumerary digits and reversion 
and Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire. to some lowly organised pro- 
But at present it is the safest genitor of man. 


Chap. H. MANNEB OF DEVELOPMENT. 57 

qnent, in which the mature uterus is furnished with 
cornua, or is partially divided into two organs ; and 
such cases, according to Owen, repeat the grade 
‘‘of concentrative development,” attained by certain 
rodents. Here perhaps we have an instance of a simple 
arrest of embryonic development, with subsequent 
growth and perfect functional development ; for either 
side of the partially double uterus is capable of per- 
forming the proper office of gestation. In other and 
rarer cases, two distinct uterine cavities are formed, 
each having its proper orifice and passage.®* No such 
stage is passed through during the ordinary develop- 
ment of the embryo ; and it is difficult to believe, 
though perhaps not impossible, that the two simple, 
minute, primitive tubes should know how (if such an 
expression may be used) to grow into two distinct 
uteri, each with a well-constructed orifice and passage, 
and each furnished with numerous muscles, nerves, 
glands and vessels, if they had not formerly passed 
through a similar course of development, as in the case 
of existing marsupials. No one will pretend that so 
perfect a structure as the abnormal double uterus in 
woman could be the result of mere chance. But the 
principle of reversion, by which a long-lost structure is 
called back into existence, might serve as the guide for 
its full development, even after the lapse of an enor- 
mous interval of time. 

Professor Canestrini, after discussing the foregoing 
and various analogous cases, arrives at the same con- 
clusion as that just given. He adduces another 

See Dr. A Farre’s well- ‘ Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. 
known article in the ‘ Cyclopasdia iii., 1868, p. 687. Professor 
of Anatomy and Physiology,’ Turner in * Edinburgh Medical 
vol. V. 1869, p. 612. Owen, Journal,’ February 1865. 


58 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


instance, in the case of the malar hone,*° which, in 
some of the Quadrumana and other mammals, normally 
consists of two portions. This is its condition in the 
human foetus when two months old ; and through 
arrested development, it sometimes remains thus in 
man when adult, more especially in the lower progna- 
thous races. Hence Canestrini concludes that some 
ancient progenitor of man must have had this hone 
normally divided into two portions, which afterwards 
became fused together. In man the frontal hone 
consists of a single piece, hut in the embryo, and in 
children, and in almost all the lower mammals, it con- 
sists of two pieces separated by a distinct suture. This 
suture occasionally persists more or less distinctly in 
man after maturity ; and more frequently in ancient 
than in recent crania, especially, as Canestrini has 
observed, in those exhumed from the Drift, and belong- 
ing to the brachycephalic type. Here again he comes 
to the same conclusion as in the analogous case of the 
malar bones. In this, and other instances presently to 


‘ Annuario della Soc. del 
Naturalisti in Modena,’ 1867, 
p. 83. Prof. Canestrini gives 
extracts on this subject from 
various authorities. Laurillard 
remarks, that as he has found a 
complete similarity in the form, 
proportions, and connection of 
the two malar hones in several 
human subjects and in certain 
apes, he cannot consider this 
disposition of the parts as simply 
accidental. Another paper on 
this same anomaly has been 
published by Dr. Saviotti in the 
‘ Gazzetta delle Cliniche,’ Turin, 
1871, where he says that traces 
of the division may be detected 


in about two per cent, of adult 
skulls ; he also remarks that it 
more frequently occurs in prog- 
nathous skulls, not of the Aryan 
race, than in others. See also 
G. Delorenzi on the same sub- 
ject ; ‘ Tre nuovi casi d’ anomalia 
deir osso malare,’ Torino, 1872. 
Also, E. Morselli, ‘Sopra una 
rara anomalia dell’ osso malare,’ 
Modena, 1872. Still more re- 
cently Gruber has written a 
pamphlet on the division of this 
bone. I give these references 
because a reviewer, without any 
grounds or scruples, has thrown 
doubts on my statements. 


Ohap. n. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


59 


be given, the canse of ancient races approaching the 
lower animals in certain characters more frequently 
than do the modern races, appears to be, that the 
latter stand at a somewhat greater distance in the long 
line of descent from their early semi-human pro- 
genitors. 

Various other anomalies in man, more or less ana- 
logous to the foregoing, have been advanced by dif- 
ferent authors, as cases of reversion ; but these seem 
not a little doubtful, for we have to descend extremely 
low in the mammalian series, before we find such 
structures normally present.^^ 

In man, the canine teeth are perfectly efficient 
instruments for mastication. But their true canine 
character, as Owen^^ remarks, “ is indicated by the 
“ conical form of the crown, which terminates in an 
“ obtuse point, is convex outward and flat or sub-con- 
cave within, at the base of which surface there is a 
feeble prominence. The conical form is best expressed 
in the Melanian races, especially the Australian. 


A whole series of cases is 
given by Isid. Geoff roy St.- 
Hilaire, ‘ Hist, des Anomalies,’ 
tom. iii. p. 437. A reviewer 
(‘ Journal of Anat. and Physio- 
logy,’ 1871, p. 366) blames me 
much for not having discussed 
the numerous cases, which have 
been recorded, of various parts 
arrested in their development. 
He says that, according to my 
theory, “ every transient con- 
“ dition of an organ, during its 
“development, is not only a 
“ means to an end, but once was 
“an end in itself.” This does 
not seem to me necessarily to 
hold good. Why should not 


variations occur during an early 
period of development, having 
no relation to reversion ; yet 
such variations might be pre- 
served and accumulated, if in 
any way serviceable, for instance, 
in shortening and simplifying 
the course of development ? And 
again, why should not injurious 
abnormalities, such as atrophied 
or hypertrophied parts, which 
have no relation to a former 
state of existence, occur at an 
early period, as well as during 
maturity ? 

‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ 
vol. iii. 1868, p. 323. 


60 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part I. 


“The canine is more deeply implanted, and by a 
“ stronger fang than the incisors.” Nevertheless, this 
tooth no longer serves man as a special weapon for 
tearing his enemies or prey ; it may, therefore, as far 
as its proper function is concerned, be considered as 
rudimentary. In every large collection of human 
skulls some may be found, as Hackel observes, with 
the canine teeth projecting considerably beyond the 
others in the same manner as in the anthropomorphous 
apes, but in a less degree. In these cases, open spaces 
between the teeth in the one jaw are left for the 
reception of the canines of the opposite jaw. An inter- 
space of this kind in a Kaffir skull, figured by Wagner, 
is surprisingly wide.*^ Considering how few are the 
ancient skulls which have been examined, compared to 
recent skulls, it is an interesting fact that in at least 
three cases the canines project largely; and in the 
Naulette jaw they are spoken of as enormous.*® 

Of the anthropomorphous apes the males alone have 
their canines fully developed ; but in the female 
gorilla, and in a less degree in the female orang, these 
teeth project considerably beyond the others; therefore 
the fact, of which I have been assured, that women 
sometimes have considerably projecting canines, is no 
serious objection to the belief that their occasional 
great development in man is a case of reversion to an 
ape-like progenitor. He who rejects with scorn the 
belief that the shape of his own canines, and their 
occasional great development in other men, are due to 

" ‘ Generelle Morphologie,’ ^ 0. Carter Blake, on a jaw 
1866, B. ii. s. civ. from La Naulette, ‘ Anthropolog. 

Carl Vogt’s ‘Lectures on Eeview,’ 1867, p. 295. Schaaff- 
Man,’ Eng. translat. 1864:, p, hausen, ibid. 1868, p, 426. 

151. 


Chap. II. 


MANNEB OP DEVELOPMENT. 


61 


onr early forefathers having been provided with these 
formidable weapons, will probably reveal, by sneering, 
the line of his descent. For though he no longer 
intends, nor has the power, to use these teeth as wea- 
pons, he will unconsciously retract his “ snarling 
muscles ” (thus named by Sir C. Bell),^® so as to expose 
them ready for action, like a dog prepared to fight. 

Many muscles are occasionally developed in man, 
which are proper to the Quadrumana or other mammals. 
Professor Ylacovich examined forty male subjects, 
and found a muscle, called by him the ischio-pubic, in 
nineteen of them ; in three others there was a liga- 
ment which represented this muscle ; and in the 
remaining eighteen no tr^ce of it. In only two out of 
thirty female subjects was this muscle developed on 
both sides, but in three others the rudimentary liga- 
ment was present. This muscle, therefore, appears to 
be much more common in the male than in the female 
sex ; and on the belief in the descent of man from some 
lower form, the fact is intelligible ; for it has been 
detected in several of the lower animals, and in all of 
these it serves exclusively to aid the male in the act of 
reproduction. 

Mr. J. Wood, in his valuable series of papers,^® has 


^ * The Anatomy of Expres- 
sion,’ 1844, pp. 110, 131. 

Quoted by Prof. Canestrini 
in the * Annuario,’ &c., 1867, 
p. 90. 

** These papers deserve care- 
ful study by any one who 
desires to learn how frequently 
our muscles vary, and in varying 
come to resemble those of the 
Quadrumana. The following 
references relate to the few points 


touched on in my text : ‘ Proc. 
Koyal Soc.’ vol. xiv. 1865, pp. 
379-384; vol. xv. 1866, pp. 
241, 242 ; vol. xv. 1867, p. 544 ; 
vol. xvi. 1868, p. 524. I may 
here add that Dr. Murie and 
Mr. St. George Mivart have 
shewn in their Memoir on the 
Lemuroidea (‘ Transact. Zoolog. 
Soc.’ vol. vii. 1869, p. 96), how 
extraordinarily variable some of 
the muscles are in these animals, 


62 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part I. 

minutely described a vast number of muscular variations 
in man, which resemble normal structures in the lower 
animals. The muscles which closely resemble those 
regularly present in our nearest allies, the Quad- 
rumana, are too numerous to be here even specified. 
In a single male subject, having a strong bodily frame, 
and well-formed skull, no less than seven muscular 
variations were observed, all of which plainly repre- 
sented muscles proper to various kinds of apes. 
This man, for instance, had on both sides of his neck a 
true and powerful “ levator daviculse^^ such as is found 
in all kinds of apes, and which is said to occur in about 
one out of sixty human subjects.'*^ Again, this man 
had “ a special abductor of the metatarsal bone of the 
“ fifth digit, such as Professor Huxley and Mr. Flower 
“ have shewn to exist uniformly in the higher and 
“ lower apes.” I will give only two additional cases ; 
the acromio-hasilar muscle is found in all mammals 
below man, and seems to be correlated with a quadru- 
pedal gait,^® and it occurs in about one out of sixty 
human subjects. In the lower extremities Mr. 
Bradley found an abductor osds metatarsi quinti in 
both feet of man ; this muscle had not up to that time 
been recorded in mankind, but is always present in the 
anthropomorphous apes. The muscles of the hands 
and arms — parts which are so eminently characteristic 
of man — are extremely liable to vary, so as to resemble 


the lowest members of the ‘Proc. E. Irish Academy,’ vol. 
Primates. Gradations, also, in x. 1868, p. 124. 
the muscles leading to structures ^ Mr. Champneys in ‘ Journal 
found in animals still lower in of Anat. and Phys.’ Nov., 1871, 
the scale, are numerous in the p. 178. 

Lemuroidea. “ ‘Journal of Anat. and 

** See also Prof. Macalister in Phys.’ May, 1872, p. 421. 


Chap. II. 


MANNEB OF DEVELOPMENT. 63 


the corresponding muscles in the lower animals.^^ 
Such resemblances are either perfect or imperfect ; yet 
in the latter case they are manifestly of a transitional 
nature. Certain variations are more common in man, 
and others in woman, without our being able to assign 
any reason. Mr. Wood, after describing numerous 
variations, makes the following pregnant remark: 
“Notable departures from the ordinary type of the 
“muscular structures run in grooves or directions, 
“ which must be taken to indicate some unknown 


“ factor, of much importance to a comprehensive know- 
“ ledge of general and scientific anatomy.” 

That this unknown factor is reversion to a former 
state of existence may be admitted as in the highest 
degree probable.®^ It is quite incredible that a man 


Prof. Macalister (ibid. p. 
121) has tabulated his obser- 
vations, and finds that muscular 
abnormalities are most frequent 
in the fore-arms, secondly, in 
the face, thirdly, in the foot, &c. 

“ The Kev. Dr. Haughton, 
after giving (‘ Proc. K. Irish 
Academy,’ June 27, 1864, p. 
715) a remarkable case of varia- 
tion in the human flexor poUicis 
longus, adds, “ This remarkable 
“ example shows that man may 
“ sometimes possess the arrange- 
“ ment of tendons of thumb and 
“ fingers characteristic of the 
“ macaque ; but whether such a 
“ case should be regarded as a 
“ macaque passing upwards into 
“ a man, or a man passing 
“ downwards into a macaque, or 
“ as a congenital freak of nature, 
“I cannot undertake to say.” 
It is satisfactory to hear so 
capable an anatomist, and so 
embittered an opponent of 


evolutionism, admitting even the 
possibility of either of his first 
propositions. Prof. Macalister 
has also described (‘ Proc. K. 
Irish Acad.’ vol. x. 1864, p. 138) 
variations in the flexor pollicis 
Icyagusy remarkable from their 
relations to the same muscle in 
the Quadrumana. 

Since the first edition of 
this book appeared, Mr. Wood 
has published another memoir in 
the ‘ Phil. Transactions,’ 1870, 
p. 83, on the varieties of the 
muscles of the human neck, 
shoulder, and chest. He here 
shows how extremely variable 
these muscles are, and how often 
and how closely the variations 
resemble the normal muscles of 
the lower animals. He sums up 
by remarking, “ It will be 
“ enough for my purpose if I 
“ have succeeded in shewing the 
“ more im^iortant forms which, 
“ when occurring as varieties in 


64 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part I. 

should through mere accident abnormally resemble 
certain apes in no less than seven of his muscles, if 
there had been no genetic connection between them. 
On the other hand, if man is descended from some ape- 
like creature, no valid reason can be assigned why 
certain muscles should not suddenly reappear after an 
interval of many thousand generations, in the same 
manner as with horses, asses, and mules, dark-coloured 
stripes suddenly reappear on the legs, and shoulders, 
after an interval of hundreds, or more probably of 
thousands of generations. 

These various cases of reversion are so closely 
related to those of rudimentary organs given in the 
first chapter, that many of them might have been 
indifferently introduced either there or here. Thus a 
human uterus furnished with cornua may be said to 
represent, in a rudimentary condition, the same organ 
in its normal state in certain mammals. Some parts 
which are rudimentary in man, as the os coccyx in 
both sexes, and the mammae in the male sex, are always 
present ; whilst others, such as the supracondyloid 
foramen, only occasionally appear, and therefore might 
have been introduced under the head of reversion. 
These several reversionary structures, as well as the 
strictly rudimentary ones, reveal the descent of man 
from some lower form in an unmistakable manner. 

Correlated Variation . — In man, as in the lower 
animals, many structures are so intimately related. 


“ the human subject, tend to “ Darwinian principle of rever- 
“ exhibit in a sufficiently marked “sion, or law of inheritance, in 
“manner what maybe considered “ this department of anatomical 
“ as proofs and examples of the “ science.” 


Chap. II. 


MANNEE OF DEVELOPMENT. 


65 


that when one part varies so does another, without our 
being able, in most cases, to assign any reason. We 
cannot say whether the one part governs the other, or 
whether both are governed by some earlier developed 
part. Various monstrosities, as I. Geoffrey repeatedly 
insists, are thus intimately connected. Homologous 
structures are particularly liable to change together, 
as we see on the opposite sides of the body, and in 
the upper and lower extremities. Meckel long ago 
remarked, that when the muscles of the arm depart 
from their proper type, they almost always imitate 
those of the leg ; and so, conversely, with the muscles 
of the legs. The organs of sight and hearing, the teeth 
and hair, the colour of the skin and of the hair, colour 
and constitution, are more or less correlated.®® Pro- 
fessor Schaaffhausen first drew attention to the relation 
apparently existing between a muscular frame and the 
strongly-pronounced supra-orbital ridges, which are so 
characteristic of the lower races of man. 

Besides the variations which can be grouped with 
more or less probability under the foregoing heads, 
there is a large class of variations which may be 
provisionally called spontaneous, for to our ignorance 
they appear to arise without any exciting cause. It 
can, however, be shewn that such variations, whether 
consisting of slight individual differences, or of 
strongly-marked and abrupt deviations of structure, 
depend much more on the constitution of the organism 
than on the nature of the conditions to which it has 
been subjected.®® 

“ The authorities for these Domestication,’ vol. ii. 320- 
several statements are given in 335. 

my ‘ Variation of Animals under ^ This whole subject has been 


66 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


liate of Increase . — Civilised populations have been 
known under favourable conditions, as in the United 
States, to double their numbers in twenty-five years ; 
and, according to a calculation, by Euler, this might 
occur in a little over twelve years.®^ At the former 
rate, the present population of the United States 
(thirty millions), would in 657 years cover the whole 
terraqueous globe so thickly, that four men would have 
to stand on each square yard of surface. The primary 
or fundamental check to the continued increase of man 
is the difiiculty of gaining subsistence, and of living in 
comfort. We may infer that this is the case from 
what we see, for instance, in the United States, where 
subsistence is easy, and there is plenty of room. If 
such means were suddenly doubled in Great Britain, 
our number would be quickly doubled. With civilised 
nations this primary check acts chiefly by restraining 
marriages. The greater death-rate of infants in the 
poorest classes is also very important ; as well as the 
greater mortality, from various diseases, of the inhabi- 
tants of crowded and miserable houses, at all ages. 
The effects of severe epidemics and wars are soon 
counterbalanced, and more than counterbalanced, in 
nations placed under favourable conditions. Emigra- 
tion also comes in aid as a temporary check, but, with 
the extremely poor classes, not to any great extent. 

There is reason to suspect, as Malthus has remarked, 
that the reproductive power is actually less in barbar- 
ous, than in civilised races. We know nothing 


discussed in chap, xxiii. vol. ii. ‘ E say on the Principle of Popu- 
of my ‘Variation of Animals lation,’ by the Eev. T. Malthus, 

and Plants under Domestication.’ vol. i. 1826, p. 6, 517, 

See the ever memorable 


Chap. II. 


MANNEE OF DEVELOPMENT. 


67 


positively on this head, for with savages no census has 
been taken ; but from the concurrent testimony of 
missionaries, and of others who have long resided with 
such people, it appears that their families are usually 
small, and large ones rare. This may he partly 
accounted for, as it is believed, by the women suckling 
their infants during a long time ; hut it is highly 
probable that savages, who often suffer much hardship, 
and who do not obtain so much nutritious food as 
civilised men, would he actually less prolific. . I have 
shewn in a former work,®® that all our domesticated 
quadrupeds and birds, and all our cultivated plants, 
are more fertile than the corresponding species in a 
state of nature. It is no valid objection to this con- 
clusion that animals suddenly supplied with an excess 
of food, or when grown very fat ; and that most plants 
on sudden removal from very poor to very rich soil, are 
rendered more or less sterile. We might, therefore, 
expect that civilised men, who in one sense are highly 
domesticated, would be more prolific than wild men. 
It is also probable that the increased fertility of 
civilised nations would become, as with our domestic 
animals, an inherited character : it is at least known 
that with mankind a tendency to produce twins runs 
in families.®® 

Notwithstanding that savages appear to be less 
prolific than civilised people, they would no doubt 
rapidly increase if their numbers were not by some 
means rigidly kept down. The Santali, or hill-tribes 
of India, have recently afforded a good illustration of 

‘ Yariation of Animals and ^ Mr. Sedgwick, ‘ British and 
Plants under Domestication,’ Foreign Medico-Chirurg. Re- 
vol. ii. pp. 111-113, 163. view,’ July, 1863, p. 170. 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part T. 


this fact ; for, as shewn by Mr. Hunter,®® they have 
increased at an extraordinary rate since vaccination 
has been introduced, other pestilences mitigated, and 
war sternly repressed. This increase, however, would 
not have been possible had not these rude people spread 
into the adjoining districts, and worked for hire. 
Savages almost always marry ; yet there is some 
prudential restraint, for they do not commonly marry 
at the earliest possible age. The young men are often 
required, to shew that they can support a wife ; and 
they generally have first to earn the price with which 
to purchase her from her parents. With savages the 
difficulty of obtaining subsistence occasionally limits 
their number in a much more direct manner than with 
civilised people, for all tribes periodically suffer from 
severe famines. At such times savages are forced to 
devour much bad food, and their health can hardly fail 
to be injured. Many accounts have been published of 
their protruding stomachs and emaciated limbs after 
and during famines. They are then, also, compelled 
to wander much, and, as I was assured in Australia, 
their infants perish in large numbers. As famines are 
periodical, depending chiefiy on extreme seasons, all 
tribes must fiuctuate in number. They cannot steadily 
and regularly increase, as there is no artificial increase 
in the supply of food. Savages, when hard pressed, 
encroach on each other’s territories, and war is the 
result ; but they are indeed almost always at war with 
their neighbours. They are liable to many accidents 
on land and water in their search for food ; and in 
some countries they suffer much from the larger beasts 

‘ The Annals of Eural Bengal,* by W. W. Hunter, 1868, p. 
259. 


Chap. II. 


MANNER OP DEVELOPMENT. 


69 


of prey. Even in India, districts have been depopu- 
lated by the ravages of tigers. 

Mai thus has discussed these several checks, but he 
does not lay stress enough on what is probably the 
most important of all, namely infanticide, especially of 
female infants, and the h^abit of procuring abortion. 
These practices now prevail in many quarters of the 
world; and infanticide seems formerly to have pre- 
vailed, as Mr. McLennan has shewn, on a still more 
extensive scale. These practices appear to have 
originated in savages recognising the difficulty, or 
rather the impossibility of supporting all the infants 
that are born. Licentiousness may also be added to 
the foregoing checks; but this does not follow from 
failing means of subsistence ; though there is reason 
to believe that in some cases (as in Japan) it has been 
intentionally encouraged as a means of keeping down 
the population. 

If we look back to an extremely remote epoch, before 
man had arrived at the dignity of manhood, he would 
have been guided more by instinct and less by reason 
than are the lowest savages at the present time. Our 
early semi-human progenitors would not have practised 
infanticide or polyandry : for the instincts of the lower 
animals are never so perverted as to lead them re- 


‘ Fiimitive Marriage,’ 1865. 

A writer in the ‘ Spectator ’ 
(March 12th, 1871, p. 320) com- 
ments as follows on this pas- 
sage : — “ Mr. Darwin finds him- 
“ self compelled to reintroduce a 
“ new doctrine of the fall of man. 
“ He shews that the instincts of 
“ the higher animals are far 
“ nobler than the habits of 
“ savage races of men, and he 


finds himself, therefore, com- 
“ pelled to re-introduce, — ^in a 
“ form of the substantial ortho- 
“doxy of which he appears to 
“be quite unconscious, — and to 
“ introduce as a scientific hypo- 
“ thesis the doctrine that man's 
“ gain of knowledge was the 
“ cause of a temporary but long- 
“ enduring moral deterioration, 
“ as indicated by the many foul 


70 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


gularly to destroy their own offspring, or to be quite 
devoid of jealousy. There would have been no pru- 
dential restraint from marriage, and the sexes would 
have freely united at an early age. Hence the pro- 
genitors of man would have tended to increase rapidly ; 
but checks of some kind, either periodical or constant, 
must have kept down their numbers, even more severely 
than with existing savages. What the precise nature 
of these checks were, we cannot say, any more than 
with most other animals. We know that horses 3,nd 
cattle, which are not extremely prolific animals, when 
first turned loose in South America, increased at an 
enormous rate. The elephant, the slowest breeder of 
all known animals, would in a few thousand years stock 
the whole world. The increase of every species of 
monkey must be checked by some means ; but not, as 
Brehm remarks, by the attacks of beasts of prey. No 
one will assume that the actual power of reproduction 
in the wild horses and cattle of America, was at first in 
any sensible degree increased ; or that, as each district 
became fully stocked, this same power was diminished. 
No doubt in this case, and in all others, many checks 
concur, and different checks under different circum- 
stances ; periodical dearths, depending on unfavourable 
seasons, being probably the most important of all. So 
it will have been with the early progenitors of man. 

Natural Selection . — We have now seen that man is 
variable in body and mind ; and that the variations are 


“ customs, especially as to mar- “ through his snatching at a 
“ riage, of savage tribes. What “ knowledge forbidden him by 

“ does the Jewish tradition of “ his highest instinct assert 

“ the moral degeneration of man “ beyond this ? ” 


Chap, II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


71 


induced, either directly or indirectly, by the same 
general causes, and obey the same general laws, as with 
the lower animals. Man has spread widely over the 
face of the earth, and must have been exposed, during 
his incessant migrations,®^ to the most diversified 
conditions. The inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, the 
Cape of Good Hope, and Tasmania in the one hemi- 
sphere, and of the Arctic regions in the other, must 
have passed through many climates, and changed their 
habits many times, before they reached their present 
homes.®^ The early progenitors of man must also have 
tended, like all other animals, to have increased beyond 
their means of subsistence ; they must, therefore, 
occasionally have been exposed to a struggle for exis- 
tence, and consequently to the rigid law of natural 
selection. Eeneficial variations of all kinds will thus, 
either occasionally or habitually, have been preserved 
and injurious ones eliminated. I do not refer to 
strongly-marked deviations of structure, which occur 
only at long intervals of time, but to mere individual 
differences. We know, for instance, that the muscles 
of our hands and feet, which determine our powers of 
movement, are liable, like those of the lower animals,®® 
to incessant variability. If then the progenitors of 
man inhabiting any district, especially one undergoing 
some change in its conditions, were divided into two 


See tome good remarks to 
lliis eifect by W. Stanley Jevons, 
“A Deduction from Darwin’s 
“ Theory,” ‘ Nature,’ 1809, p. 
231. 

^ Latham, ‘ Man and his 
Migrations,’ 1851, p. 135. 

Messrs. Murie and Mivart 
in their ‘ Anatomy of the Lemu- 


roidi, a ’ (‘ Transact. Zoolog. Soc.’ 
vol. vii. 1869, pp. 96-98) say, 
“some muscles are so irregular 
“ in their distribution that they 
“ cannot be well classed in acy 
“of the above groups.” These 
muscles differ even on the 
opposite sides of the same 
individual. 


72 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 1. 


equal bodies, the one half which included all the 
individuals best adapted by their powers of movement 
for gaining subsistence, or for defending themselves, 
would on an average survive in greater numbers, and 
procreate more offspring than the other and less well 
endowed half. 

Man in the rudest state in which he now exists is 
the most dominant animal that has ever appeared on 
this earth. He has spread more widely than any other 
highly organised form : and all others have yielded 
before him. He manifestly owes this immense 
superiority to his intellectual faculties, to his social 
habits, which lead him to aid and defend his fellows, 
and to his corporeal structure. The supreme impor- 
tance of these characters has been proved by the final 
Arbitrament of the battle for life. Through his powers 
of intellect, articulate language has been evolved ; and 
on this his wonderful advancement has mainly depended. 
As Mr. Chauncey Wright remarks “a psychological 
‘ analysis of the faculty of language shews, that even 
“ the smallest proficiency in it might require more 
“ brain power than the greatest proficiency in any 
“ other direction.” He has invented and is able to use 
various weapons, tools, traps, &c., with which he defends 
himself, kills or catches prey, and otherwise obtains 
food. He has made rafts or canoes for fishing or 
crossing over to neighbouring fertile islands. He has 
discovered the art of making fire, by which hard and 
stringy roots can be rendered digestible, and poisonous 
roots or herbs innocuous. This discovery of fire, 
probably the greatest ever made by man,, excepting 

Limits of Natural Selection, ‘ North American Keview,’ Oct. 
1870, p. 295. 


Chap. II. 


MANNER' OF DEVELOPMENT. 


73 


language, dates from before the dawn of history. 
These several inventions, by which man in the rudest 
state has become so pre-eminent, are the direct results 
of the development of his powers of observation, 
memory, curiosity, imagination, and reason. I cannot, 
therefore, understand how it is that Mr. Wallace 
maintains, that “ natural selection could only have 
“ endowed the savage with a brain a little superior to 
“ that of an ape.” 

Although the intellectual powers and social habits of 
man are of paramount importance to him, we must not 
underrate the importance of his bodily structure, to 
which subject the remainder of this chapter will be 
devoted ; the development of the intellectual and social 
or moral faculties being discussed in a later chapter. 

Even to hammer with precision is no easy matter, as 
every one who has tried to learn carpentry will admit. 
To throw a stone with as true an aim as a Fuegian in 
defending himself, or in killing birds, requires the most 
consummate perfection in the correlated action of the 


‘ Quarterly Review,’ April 
18G9, p. 392. This subject is 
more fully discussed in Mr. 
Wallace’s ‘ Contributions to the 
Theory of Natural Selection,’ 
1870, in which all the essays 
referred to in this work are re- 
imblished. The ‘ Essay on 
Man,’ has been ably criticised 
by Prof. Claparede, one of the 
most distiDguished zoologists in 
Europe, in an article published 
in the ‘ Bibliotheque Univer- 
selle,’ June 1870. The remark 
quoted in my text will surprise 
every one who has read Mr. 
Wallace’s celebrated paper on 
‘The Origin of Human Races 


deduced from the Theory of 
Natural Selection,’ originally 
published in the ‘ Anthropologi- 
cal Review,’ May 1864, p. clviii. 
I cannot here resist quoting a 
most just remark by Sir J. 
Lubbock (‘ Prehistoric Times,’ 
1865, p. 479) in reference to this 
paper, namely, that Mr. AVallace, 
“ with characteristic unselfish- 
“ ness, ascribes it (i.e. the idea 
‘'of natural selection) unreserv- 
“ edly to Mr. Darwin, although, 
‘‘ as is well known, he struck 
“ out the idea independently, 
“and pubhshed it, though not 
“ with the same elaboration, at 
“ the same time.” 


74 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


muscles of the hand, arm, and shoulder, and, further, a 
fine sense of touch. In throwing a stone or spear, and 
in many other actions, a man must stand firmly on his 
feet ; and this again demands the perfect co-adaptation 
of numerous muscles. To chip a flint into the rudest 
tool, or to form a barbed spear or hook from a bone, 
demands the use of a perfect hand ; for, as a most 
capable judge, Mr. Schoolcraft,®® remarks, the shaping 
fragments of stone into knives, lances, or arrow-heads, 
shews “ extraordinary ability and long practice.” This 
is to a great extent proved by the fact that primeval 
men practised a division of labour ; each man did not 
manufacture his own flint tools or rude pottery, but 
certain individuals appear to have devoted themselves 
to such work, no doubt receiving in exchange the 
produce of the chase. Archaeologists are convinced 
that an enormous interval of time elapsed before our 
ancestors thought of grinding chipped flints into 
smooth tools. One can hardly doubt, that a man-like 
animal who possessed a hand and arm sufficiently 
perfect to throw a stone with precision, or to form a 
flint into a rude tool, could, with sufficient practice, as 
far as mechanical skill alone is concerned, make almost 
anything which a civilised man can make. The 
structure of the hand in this respect may be compared 
with that of the vocal organs, which in the apes are used 
for uttering various signal- cries, or, as in one genus, 
musical cadences ; but in man the closely similar vocal 
organs have become adapted through the inherited 
effects of use for the utterance of articulate language. 

Quoted by Mr. Lawson Journal of Medical Science,’ 
Tait in his ‘Law of Natural Feb. 1869. Dr. Keller is like- 

Selection,’ — ‘ Dublin Quarterly wise quoted to the same effect. 


Chap. H. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


75 


Turning now to the nearest allies of men, and 
therefore to the best representatives of our early 
progenitors, we find that the hands of the Quadrunjana 
are constructed on the same general pattern as our 
own, but are far less perfectly adapted for diversified 
uses. Their hands do not serve for locomotion so well 
as the feet of a dog ; as may be seen in such monkeys 
as the chimpanzee and orang, which walk on the outer 
margins of the palms, or on the knuckles.®® Their 
hands, however, are admirably adapted for climbing 
trees. Monkeys seize thin branches or ropes, with the 
thumb on one side and the fingers and palm on the 
other, in the same manner as we do. They can thus 
also lift rather large objects, such as the neck of a 
bottle, to their mouths. Baboons turn over stones, 
and scratch up roots with their hands. They seize 
nuts, insects, or other small objects with the thumb in 
opposition to the fingers, and no doubt they thus 
extract eggs and the young from the nests of birds. 
American monkeys beat the wild oranges on the 
branches until the rind is cracked, and then tear it off 
with the fingers of the two hands. In a wild state they 
break open hard fruits with stones. Other monkeys 
open mussel-shells with the two thumbs. With their 
fingers they pull out thorns and burs, and hunt for 
each other’s parasites. They roll down stones, or 
throw them at their enemies : nevertheless, thev are 
clumsy in these various actions, and, as I have myself 
seen, are quite unable to throw a stone with precision. 

It seems to me far from true that because “ objects 
“ are grasped clumsily ” by monkeys, a much less 
“ specialised organ of prehension ” would have served 
“ Owen, * Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. p. 71. 


76 


THE DESCENT OE MAN. 


Part I. 


them’® equally well with their present hands. On the 
contrary, I see no reason to doubt that more perfectly 
constructed hands would have been an advantage to 
them, provided that they were not thus rendered less 
fitted for climbing trees. We may suspect that a 
hand as perfect as that of man would have been dis- 
advantageous for climbing ; for the most arboreal 
monkeys in the world, namely, Ateles in America, 
Colobus in Africa, and Hylobates in Asia, are either 
thumbless, or their toes partially cohere, so that their 
limbs are converted into mere grasping hooks.” 

As soon as some ancient member in the great series 
of the Primates came to be less arboreal, owing to a 
change in its manner of procuring subsistence, or to 
some change in the surrounding conditions, its habitual 
manner of progression would have been modified : and 
thus it would have been rendered more strictly quad- 
rupedal or bipedal. Baboons frequent hilly and rocky 
districts, and only from necessity climb high trees ; 
and they have acquired almost the gait of a dog. Man 
alone has become a biped ; and we can, I think, partly 
see how he has come to assume his erect attitude, 
which forms one of his most conspicuous characters. 
Man could not have attained his present dominant 
position in the world without the use of his hands. 


‘ Quarterly Review,’ April 
1869, p. 392. 

In Hylobates syndactylus^ 
as the name expresses, two of 
the toes ]-egiilarly cohere ; and 
this, as Mr. Blyth informs me, 
is occasionally the case with the 
toes of H. ayilis, lar^ and leucis- 
cus. Colobus is strictly arbo- 
real and extraordinarily active 


(Brehm, ‘ Thierleben,’ B. i. s. 
50), but whether a better 
climber than the species of the 
allied genera, I do not know. 
It deserves notice that the feet 
of the sloths, the most arboreal 
animals in the world, are won- 
derfully hook-like. 

Brehm, ‘ Thierleben,’ B. L 
8. 80. 


Chap. n. MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 77 

which are so admirably adapted to act in obedience to 
his will. Sir C. BelP® insists that “ the hand supplies 
“ all instruments, and by its correspondence with the 
“ intellect gives him universal dominion.” But the 
hands and arms could hardly have become perfect 
enough to have manufactured weapons, or to have 
hurled stones and spears with a true aim, as long as 
they were habitually used for locomotion and for 
supporting the whole weight of the body, or, as before 
remarked, so long as they were especially fitted for 
climbing trees. Such rough treatment would also 
have blunted the sense of touch, on which their 
delicate use largely depends. From these causes alone 
it would have been an advantage to man to become a 
biped; but for many actions it is indispensable that 
the arms and whole upper part of the body should be 
free ; and he must for this end stand firmly on his 
feet. To gain this great advantage, the feet have been 
rendered flat; and the great toe has been peculiarly 
modifled, though this has entailed the almost complete 
loss of its power of prehension. It accords with the 
principle of the division of physiological labour, pre- 
vailing throughout the animal kingdom, that as the 
hands became perfected for prehension, the feet should 
have become perfected for support and locomotion. 
With some savages, however, the foot has not 
altogether lost its prehensile power, as shewn by 
their manner of climbing trees, and of using them in 
other ways.'^ 

73 « The Hand,” &c. ‘Bridge- tiirliche Schopfimgsgeschichte,’ 
water Treatise,’ 1833, p. 38. 1868 s. 507. Dr. Biichner 

Hackel has an excellent ( ‘ Conferences sur la Theorie 

discussion on the steps by which Darwinienne,’ 1869, p. 135) has 
man became a biped : ‘ Na- given good cases of the use of 


78 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part T. 


If it be an advantage to man to stand firmly on his 
feet and to have his hands and arms free, of which, 
from his pre-eminent success in the battle of life 
there can be no doubt, then I can see no reason why it 
should not have been advantageous to the progenitors 
of man to have become more and more erect or bipedal. 
They would thus have been better able to defend 
themselves with stones or clubs, to attack their prey, 
or otherwise to obtain food. The best built individuals 
would in the long run have succeeded best, and have 
survived in larger numbers. If the gorilla and a few 
allied forms had become extinct, it might have been 
argued, with great force and apparent truth, that an 
animal could not have been gradually converted from a 
quadruped into a biped, as all the individuals in an 
intermediate condition would have been miserably 
iil-fitted for progression. But we know (and this is 
well worthy of reflection) that the anthropomorphous 
apes are now actually in an intermediate condition ; 
and no one doubts that they are on the whole well 
adapted for their conditions of life. Thus the gorilla 
runs with a sidelong shambling gait, but more 
commonly progresses by resting on its bent hands. 
The long-armed apes occasionally use their arms like 
crutches, swinging their bodies forward between them, 
and some kinds of Hylobates, without having been 
taught, can walk or run upright with tolerable quick- 
ness ; yet they move awkwardly, and much less 
securely than man. We see, in short, in existing 

the foot as a prehensile organ allude in the following para- 
hy man ; and has also written graph : see also Owen (‘ Ana- 
on the manner of progression tomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. hi. p. 
of the higher apes, to M^hich I 71) on this latter subject, 


Crap. II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


79 


monkeys a manner of progression intermediate between 
that of a quadruped and a biped ; but, as an un- 
prejudiced judge’® insists, the anthropomorphous apes 
approach in structure more nearly to the bipedal than 
to the quadrupedal type. 

As the progenitors of man became more and more 
erect, with their hands and arms more and more 
modified for prehension and other purposes, with their 
feet and legs at the same time transformed for firm 
support and progression, endless other changes of 
structure would have become necessary. The pelvis 
would have to be broadened, the spine peculiarly 
curved, and the head fixed in an altered position, all 
which changes have been attained by man. Prof. 
Schaaff hausen’® maintains that “the powerful mastoid 
“ processes of the human skull are the result of his 
“ erect position ; ” and these processes are absent in 
the orang, chimpanzee, &c., and are smaller in the 
gorilla than in man. Various other structures, which 
appear connected with man’s erect position, might 
here have been added. It is very difficult to decide 
how far these correlated modifications are the result of 
natural selection, and how far of the inherited efi’ects 
of the increased use of certain parts, or of the action 
of one part on another. No doubt these means of 
change often co-operate : thus when certain muscles, 
and the crests of bone to which they are attached, 
become enlarged by habitual use, this shews that 

Prof. Broca, La Constitu- thropological Review, ’Oct. 1868, 

tion des Vertebres caudales; p. 428. Owen (‘Anatomy of 
‘ La Revue d’Antliropologie,’ Vertebrates,’ vo). ii. 1866, p. 

1872, p. 26, (separate copy). 551) on the mastoid processes 

‘ On the Primitive Form in the higher apes, 
of the Sknll,’ translated in ‘ An- 


80 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


certain actions are habitually performed and must bo 
serviceable. Hence the individuals which performed 
them best, would tend to survive in greater numbers. 

The free use of the arms and hands, partly the 
' cause and partly the result of man’s erect position, 
appears to have led in an indirect manner to other 
modifications of structure. The early male forefathers 
of man were, as previously stated, probably furnished 
with great canine teeth ; bnt as they gradually ac- 
quired the habit of using stones, clubs, or other 
weapons, for fighting with their enemies or rivals, 
they would use their jaws and teeth less and less. In 
this case, the jaws, together with the teeth, would 
become reduced in size, as we may feel almost sure 
from innumerable analogous cases. In a future 
chapter we shall meet with a closely parallel case, in 
the reduction or complete disappearance of the canine 
teeth in male ruminants, apparently in relation with 
the development of their horns; and in horses, in 
relation to their habit of fighting with their incisor 
teeth and hoofs. 

In the adult male anthropomorphous apes, as 
Kiitimeyer,^’ and others, have insisted, it is the effect 
on the skull of the great development of the jaw- 
muscles that causes it to differ so greatly in many 
respects from that of man, and has given to these 
animals “ a truly frightful physiognomy.” Therefore, 
as the jaws and teeth in man’s progenitors gradually 
become reduced in size, the adult skull would have 
come to resemble more and more that of existing man. 
As we shall hereafter see, a great reduction of the 

‘ Die Grenzen der Thierwelt, eine Betrachtung zu Darwin’a 
Lchre,’ 1868. s. 51, 


Chap II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


81 


canine teeth in the males would almost certainly affect 
the teeth of the females through inheritance. 

As the various mental faculties gradually developed 
themselves the brain would almost certainly become 
larger. No one, I presume, doubts that the • large 
proportion which the size of man’s brain bears to his 
body, compared to the same proportion in the gorilla 
or orang, is closely connected with his higher mental 
powers. We meet with closely analogous facts with 
insects, for in ants the cerebral ganglia are of extra- 
ordinary dimensions, and in all the Hymenoptera these 
ganglia are many times larger than in the less 
intelligent orders, such as beetles.’® On the other 
hand, no one supposes that the intellect of any two 
animals or of any two men can be accurately gauged 
by the cubic contents of their skulls. It is certain 
that there may be extraordinary mental activity with 
an extremely small absolute mass of nervous matter: 
thus the wonderfully diversified instincts, mental 
powers, and affections of ants are notorious, yet their 
cerebral ganglia are not so large as the quarter of a 
small pin’s head. Under this point of view, the brain 
of an ant is one of the most marvellous atoms of 
matter in the world, perhaps more so than the brain 
of a man. 

The belief that there exists in man some close 
relation between the size of the brain and the develop- 
ment of the intellectual faculties is supported by the 
comparison of the skulls of savage and civilised races, 

Dujardin, ‘ Annales des Sc. 1870, p. 14. My son, Mr. E. 
Nat.’ 3rd series Zoolog. tom. Darwin, dissected for me the 
xiv. 1850, p. 203. See also cerebral ganglia of the Formica 
Mr. Lowne, ^Anatomy and rufa. 

Phys. of the Musca vomitoriay 


82 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Fart t. 


of ancient and modern people, and by the analogy of 
the whole vertebrate series. Dr. J. Barnard Davis 
has proved,’® by many careful measurements, that the 
mean internal capacity of the skull in Europeans is 
92*3 cubic inches; in Americans 87 ’5; in Asiatics 
87 • 1 ; and in Australians only 81 * 9 cubic inches. 
Professor Broca®® found that the nineteenth century 
skulls from graves in Paris were larger than those 
from vaults of the twelfth century, in the proportion of 
1484 to 1426 ; and that the increased size, as ascer- 
tained by measurements, was exclusively in the frontal 
part of the skull — the seat of the intellectual faculties. 
Prichard is persuaded that the present inhabitants of 
Britain have “ much more capacious brain-cases ” than 
the ancient inhabitants. Nevertheless, it must be 
admitted that some skulls of very high antiquity, such 
as the famous one of Neanderthal, are well developed 
and capacious.®^ With respect to the lower animals, 
M. E. Lartet,®^ by comparing the crania of tertiary 
and recent mammals belonging to the same groups, 
has come to the remarkable conclusion that the brain 


‘ Philosophical Transac- 
tions,’ 1869, p. 613. 

‘ Les Selections,’ M. P. 
Broca, ‘Revue d’Anth Topologies,’ 
1873 ; see also, as quoted in C. 
Vogt’s ‘ Lectures on Man,’ Eng. 
translat. 1864, pp. 88, 90. 
Prichard, ‘ Phys. Hist, of Man- 
kind,’ vol. i. 1838, p. 305. 

In the interesting article 
just referred to. Prof. Broca has 
well remarked, that in civilised 
nations, the average capacity of 
the skull must be lowered by 
the ])rcservation of a consider- 
able number of individuals, weak 


in mind and body, who would 
have been promptly eliminated 
in the savage state. On the 
other hand, with savages, the 
average includes only the more 
capable individuals, who have 
been able to survive under ex- 
tremely hard conditions of life. 
Broca thus explains the other- 
wise inexplicable fact, that the 
mean capacity of the skull of 
the ancient Troglodytes of Lozere 
is greater than that of modern 
Frenchmen. 

‘ Comptes-rendus des Sci- 
ences,’ &c., J une 1, 1868. 


Chap. U. MANNER OP DEVELOPMENT. 83 

is generally larger and the convolutions are more 
complex in the more recent forms. On the other 
hand, I have shewn^® that the brains of domestic 
rabbits are considerably reduced in bulk, in com- 
parison with those of the wild rabbit or hare ; and 
this may he attributed to their having been closely 
confined during many generations, so that they have 
exerted their intellect, instincts, senses and voluntary 
movements hut little. 

The gradually increasing weight of the brain and 
skull in man must have influenced the development of 
the supporting spinal column, more especially whilst he 
was becoming erect. As this change of position was 
being brought about, the internal pressure of the 
brain will also have influenced the form of the skull ; 
for many facts shew how easily the skull is thus 
afi’ected. Ethnologists believe that it is modified by 
the kind of cradle in which infants sleep. Habitual 
spasms of the muscles, and a cicatrix from a severe 
burn, have permanently modified the facial bones. In 
young persons whose heads have become fixed either 
sideways or backwards, owing to disease, one of the 
two eyes has changed its position, and the shape of 
the skull has been altered apparently by the pressure 
of the brain in a new direction.®^ I have shewn that 


^ * The Variation of Animals 
and Plants under Domestica- 
tion,’ Yol. i. pp. 124-129. 

Schaaffhausen gives from 
Blumenbach and Busch, the 
cases of the spasms and cicatrix, 
in ‘ Anthropolog. Review,’ Oct. 
1868, p. 420. Dr. Jarrold (* An- 
thropologia,’ 1808, pp. 115, 116) 
adduces from Camper and from 


his own observations, cases of 
the modification of the skull 
from the head being fixed in an 
unnatural position. He believes 
that in certain trades, such as 
that of a shoemaker, where the 
head is habitually held forward, 
the forehead becomes more 
rounded and prominent. 


84 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


with long-eared rabbits even so trilling a cause as the 
lopping forward of one ear drags forward almost every 
bone of the skull on that side ; so that the bones on 
the opposite side no longer strictly correspond. 
Lastly, if any animal were to increase or diminish 
much in general size, without any change in its 
mental powers, or if the mental powers were to be 
much increased or diminished, without any great 
change in the size of the body, the shape of the skull 
would almost certainly be altered. I infer this from 
my observations on domestic rabbits, some kinds of 
which have become very much larger than the wild 
animal, whilst others have retained nearly the same 
size, but in both cases the brain has been much 
reduced relatively to the size of the body. Now I was 
at first much surprised on finding that in all these 
rabbits the skull had become elongated or dolichoce- 
phalic ; for instance, of two skulls of nearly equal 
breadth, the one from a wild rabbit and the other 
from a large domestic kind, the former was 3 * 15 and 
the latter 4*3 inches in length.®® One of the most 
marked distinctions in different races of men is that 
the skull in some is elongated, and in others rounded ; 
and here the explanation suggested by the case of the 
rabbits may hold good; for Welcker finds that short 

men incline more to biachycephaly, and tall men to 
“ dolichocephaly ; ” and tall men may be compared 
with the larger and longer-bodied rabbits, all of which 
have elongated skulls, or are dolichocephalic. 

“ ‘ Variation of Animals,’ &c., “ Quoted by Schaaflfhausen, 

vol. i. p. 117, on the elongation in ‘ Antbropolog. Keview,* Oct. 
of the skull ; p. 119, on the 1868, p. 419. 
effect of the lopping of one ear. 


Chap. II. 


MANNEK OF DEVELOPMENT. 


85 


From these several facts we can understand, to a 
certain extent, the means by which the great size and 
more or less rounded form of the skull have been 
acquired by man ; and these are characters eminently 
distinctive of him in comparison with the lower 
animals. 

Another most conspicuous difference between man 
and the lower animals is the nakedness of his skin. 
Whales and porpoises (Cetacea), dugongs (Sirenia) and 
the hippopotamus are naked ; and this may be advan- 
tageous to them for gliding through the water ; nor 
would it he injurious to them from the loss of warmth, 
as the species, which inhabit the colder regions, are 
protected by a thick layer of blubber, serving the 
same purpose as the fur of seals and otters. Elephants 
and rhinoceroses are almost hairless; and as certain 
extinct species, which formerly lived under an Arctic 
climate, were covered with long wool or hair, it would 
almost appear as if the existing species of both genera 
had lost their hairy covering from exposure to heat 
This appears the more probable, as the elephants in 
India which live on elevated and cool districts are more 
hairy®’ than those on the lowlands. May we then 
infer that man became divested of hair from having 
aboriginally inhabited some tropical land ? That the 
hair is chiefly retained in the male sex on the chest 
and face, and in both sexes at the junction of all four 
limbs with the trunk, favours this inference— on the 
assumption that the hair was lost before man became 
erect ; for the parts which now retain most hair would 
then have been most protected from the heat of the 
sun. The crown of the head, however, offers a curious 
Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. p. 619. 


86 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


exception, for at all times it must have been one of the 
most exposed parts, yet it is thickly clothed with hair. 
The fact, however, that the other members of the order 
of Primates, to which man belongs, although inhabiting 
various hot regions, are well clothed with hair, generally 
thickest on the upper surface,^® is opposed to the sup- 
position that man became naked through the action of 
the sun. Mr. Belt believes that within the tropics it 
is an advantage to man to be destitute of hair, as he is 
thus enabled to free himself of the multitude of ticks 
(acari) and other parasites, with which he is often 
infested, and which sometimes cause ulceration. But 
whether this evil is of sufficient magnitude to have led 
to the denudation of his body through natural selection, 
may be doubted, since none of the many quadrupeds 
inhabiting the tropics have, as far as I know, acquired 
any specialised means of relief. The view which seems 
to me the most probable is that man, or rather 
primarily woman, became divested of hair for orna- 
mental purposes, as we shall see under Sexual Selection ; 
and, according to this belief, it is not surprising that 
man should differ so greatly in hairiness from all other 
Primates, for characters, gained through sexual selec- 


Isidore Geoifroy St.-Hilaire 
remarks (‘ Hist. Nat. Generale,’ 
tom. ii. 1859, pp. 215-217) on 
the head ot. n)an being covered 
with long hair ; also on the 
upper surfaces of monkeys and 
of other mammals being more 
thickly clothed than the lower 
surfaces. This has likewise been 
observed by various authors. 
Prof. P. Gervais (‘ Hist. Nat. des 
Mammifere-V tom. i. 1854, p. 
28), however, states tliat in the 


Gorilla the hair is thinner on the 
back, where it is partly rubbed 
off, than on the lower surface. 

I'he ‘ Naturalist in Nicara- 
gua,’ 1874, p. 209. As some 
confirmation of Mr. Belt’s view, 
1 may quote the following pas- 
sage from Sir W. Denison (‘ Va- 
rieties of Vice-Regal Life,’ vol. i. 
1870, p. 440) : “It is said to be 
“ a practice with the Australians, 
“ when the vermin get trouble- 
“ some, to singe themselves.” 


Chap TT. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


87 


tion, often differ to an extraordinary degree in closely 
related forms. 

According to a popular impression, the absence of a 
tail is eminently distinctive of man ; but as those apes 
which come nearest to him are destitute of this organ, 
its disappearance does not relate exclusively to man. 
The tail often differs remarkably in length within the 
same genus: thus in some species of Macacus it is 
longer than the whole body, and is formed of twenty- 
four vertebrae ; in others it consists of a scarcely visible 
stump, containing only three or four vertebrae. In 
some kinds of baboons there are twenty-five, whilst in 
the mandrill there are ten very small stunted caudal 
vertebrae, or, according to Cuvier,®® sometimes only 
five. The tail, whether it be long or short, almost 
always tapers towards the end ; and this, I presume, 
results from the atrophy of the terminal muscles, 
together with their arteries and nerves, through disuse, 
leading to the atrophy of the terminal bones. But no 
explanation can at present he given of the great 
diversity which often occurs in its length. Here, 
however, we are more specially concerned with the 
complete external disappearance of the tail. Professor 
Broca has recently shewn that the tail in all quadru- 
peds consists of two portions, generally separated 
abruptly from each other ; the basal portion consists 
of vertebrae, more or less perfectly channelled and 
furnished with apophyses like ordinary vertebrae ; 
whereas those of the terminal portion are not chan- 

Mr. St. George Mivart, ii. p. 517. Isidore Geotfroy, 
‘ Proc. Zoolog. See.’ 1865, pp. ‘ Hist. Nat. Gen.’ (om. ii. p. 244. 
562, 583. Dr. J. E. Gray, ‘ Cat. ‘ Revue d’Anthropologie,’ 

Brit. Mus. : Skeletons.’ Owen, 1872; ‘La Constitution des 
‘ Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. Vert^bres caudaler.’ 


88 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


nelled, are almost smooth, and scarcely resemble true 
vertebrae. A tail, though not externally visible, is 
really present in man and the anthropomorphous apes, 
and is constructed on exactly the same pattern in both. 
In the terminal portion the vertebrae, constituting the 
os coccijx, are quite rudimentary, being much reduced in 
size and number. In the basal portion, the vertebrae 
are likewise few, are united firmly together, and are 
arrested in development ; hut they have been rendered 
much broader and flatter than the corresponding ver- 
tebrae in the tails of other animals : they constitute 
what Broca calls the accessory sacral vertebrae. These 
are of functional importance by supporting certain 
internal parts and in other ways ; and their modifica- 
tion is directly connected with the erect or semi-erect 
attitude of man and the anthropomorphous apes. This 
conclusion is the more trustworthy, as Broca formerly 
held a different view, which he has now abandoned. 
The modification, therefore, of the basal caudal ver- 
tebras in man and the higher apes may have been 
effected, directly or indirectly, through natural selec- 
tion. 

But what are we to say about the rudimentary and 
variable vertebrae of the terminal portion of the tail, 
forming the os coccyx ? A notion which has often been, 
and will no doubt again he ridiculed, namely, that 
fiiction has had something to do with the disappear- 
ance of the external portion of the tail, is not so 
ridiculous as it at first appears. Dr. Anderson^^ states 
that the extremely short tail of Macacus hrunneus is 
formed of eleven vertebrae, including the imbedded 
basal ones. The extremity is tendinous and contains 
‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.,’ 1872, p. 210. 


Chap. II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


89 


no vertebrae; this is succeeded by live rudimentary 
ones, so minute that together they are only one line 
and a half in length, and these are permanently bent 
to one side in the shape of a hook. The free part of 
the tail, only a little above an inch in length, includes 
only four more small vertebrae. This short tail is 
carried erect ; but about a quarter of its total length is 
doubled on to itself to the left ; and this terminal part, 
which includes the hook-like portion, serves to fill up 
‘‘ the interspace between the upper divergent portion 
‘ of the calosities ; ” so that the animal sits on it, and 
thus renders it rough and callous. Dr. Anderson thus 
sums up his observations : “ These facts seem to me to 
“ have only one explanation ; this tail, from its short 
“ size, is in the monkey’s way when it sits down, and 
“ frequently becomes placed under the animal while it 
“ is in this attitude ; and from the circumstance that 
“ it does not extend beyond the extremity of the ischial 
“ tuberosities, it seems as if the tail originally had been 
“ bent round by the will of the animal, into the inter - 
“ space between the callosities, to escape being pressed 
“ between them and the ground, and that in time the 
“ curvature became permanent, fitting in of itself when 
“ the organ happens to be sat upon.” Under these 
circumstances it is not surprising that the surface of 
the tail should have been roughened and rendered 
callous, and Dr. Murie,^^ who carefully observed this 
species in the Zoological Gardens, as well as three 
other closely allied forms with slightly longer tails, 
says that when the animal sits down, the tail “ is 
“ necessarily thrust to one side of the buttocks ; and 
“ whether long or short its root is consequently liable 
‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.,’ 1872, p. 786. 


90 


THK DESCENT OF MAN 


Part 1. 


to be nibbed or chafed.” As we now have evidence 
that mutilations occasionally produce an inherited 
effect, it is not very improbable that in short-tailed 
monkeys, the projecting part of the tail, being function- 
ally useless, should after many generations have 
become rudimentary and distorted, from being con- 
tinually rubbed and chafed. We see the projecting 
part in this condition in the Macacus hrunneus, and 
absolutely aborted in the M. ecaudatus and in several 
of the higher apes. Finally, then, as far as we can 
judge, the tail has disappeared in man and the anthro- 
pomorphous apes, owing to the terminal portion having 
been injured by friction during a long lapse of time ; 
the basal and embedded portion having been reduced 
and modified, so as to become suitable to the erect or 
semi-erect position. 


I have now endeavoured to shew that some of the 
most distinctive characters of man have in all proba- 
bility been acquired, either directly, or more commonly 
indirectly, through natural selection. We should bear 
in mind that modifications in structure or constitution 
which do not serve to adapt an organism to its habits 
of life, to the food which it consumes, or passively to 
the surrounding conditions, cannot have been thus 
acquired. We must not, however, be too confident in 
deciding what modifications are of service to each 

I allude to Dr. Brown- have occasion to refer to Mr. 
Sequard’s observations on the Salvin’s interesting case of the 
transmitted effect of an opeia- apparently inherited effects of 
tion causing epilepsy in guinea- mot-mots biting off the barbs of 
pigs, and likewise more recently their own tail-feathers. See also 
on the analogous effects of cut- on the general subject ‘ Variation 
ting the sympatl:etic nerve in of Animals and Plants under Do- 
the neck. 1 shall hereafter mestication,’ vol. ii. pp. 22-24. 


Chap. II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


91 


being : we should remember how little we know about 
the use of many parts, or what changes in the blood 
or tissues may serve to fit an organism for a new 
climate or new kinds of food. Nor must we forget the 
principle of correlation, by which, as Isidore Geoffroy 
has shewn in the case of man, many strange deviations 
of structure are tied together. Independently of 
correlation, a change in one part often leads, through 
the increased or decreased use of other parts, to other 
changes of a quite unexpected nature. It is also well 
to reflect on such facts, as the wonderful growth of 
galls on plants caused by the poison of an insect, and 
on the remarkable changes of colour in the plumage of 
parrots when fed on certain fishes, or inoculated with 
the poison of toads for we can thus see that the 
fluids of the system, if altered for some special purpose, 
might induce other changes. We should especially 
bear in mind that modifications acquired and continually 
used during past ages for some useful purpose, would 
probably become firmly fixed, and might be long- 
inherited. 

Thus a large yet undefined extension may safely be 
given to the direct and indirect results of natural 
selection ; but I now admit, after reading the essay by 
Nageli on plants, and the remarks by various authors 
with respect to animals, more especially those recently 
made by Professor Broca, that in the earlier editions 
of my ‘Origin of Species’ I perhaps attributed too 
much to the action of natural selection or the survival 
of the fittest. I have altered the fifth edition of the 
‘ Origin ’ so as to confine my remarks to adaptive 

‘The Variation of xVniraa's and Plants under Domestication,’ 
vol. ii. pp. 280, 282. 


92 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt I. 


changes of structure ; but I am convinced, from the 
light gained during even the last few years, that very 
many structures which now appear to us useless, will 
hereafter he proved to be useful, and will therefore 
come within the range of natural selection. Neverthe- 
less, I did not formerly consider sufficiently the 
existence of structures, which, as far as we can at 
present judge, are neither beneficial nor injurious ; and 
this I believe to be one of the greatest oversights as 
yet detected in my work. I may be permitted to say, 
as some excuse, that I had tw^o distinct objects in view ; 
firstly, to shew that species had not been separately 
created, and secondly, that natural selection had been 
the chief agent of change, though largely aided by the 
inherited effects of habit, and slightly by the direct 
action of the surrounding conditions. I was not, how- 
ever, able to annul the influence of my former belief, 
then almost universal, that each species had been 
purposely created ; and this led to my tacit assumption 
that every detail of structure, excepting rudiments, 
was of some special, though unrecognised, service. 
Any one with this assumption in his mind would 
- naturally extend too far the action of natural selection, 
either during past or present times. Some of those 
who admit the principle of evolution, but reject natural 
selection, seem to forget, when criticising my book, that 
I had the above two objects in view ; hence if I have 
erred in giving to natural selection great power, which 
1 am very far from admitting, or in having exaggerated 
its power, which is in itself probable, I have at least, 
as I hope, done good service in aiding to overthrow the 
dogma of separate creations. 

It is, as I can now see, probable that all organic 


Chap. II. 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


93 


beings, including man, possess peculiarities of structure, 
which neither are now, nor were formerly of any 
service to them, and which, therefore, are of no physio- 
logical importance. We know not what produces the 
numberless slight differences between the individuals 
of each species, for reversion only carries the problem 
a few steps backwards, but each peculiarity must have 
had its efficient cause. If these causes, whatever they 
may be, were to act more uniformly and energetic- 
ally during a lengthened period (and against this no 
reason can be assigned), the result would probably be 
not a mere slight individual difference, but a well- 
marked and constant modification, though one of no 
physiological importance. Changed structures, which 
are in no way beneficial, cannot be kept uniform 
through natural selection, though the injurious will be 
thus eliminated. Uniformity of chaiacter would, how- 
ever, naturally follow from the assumed uniformity of 
the exciting causes, and likewise from the free inter- 
crossing of many individuals. During successive 
periods, the same organism might in this manner 
acquire successive modifications, which would be trans- 
mitted in a nearly uniform state as long as the exciting 
causes remained the same and there was free inter- 
crossing. With respect to the exciting causes we can 
only say, as when speaking of so-called spontaneous 
variations, that they relate much more closely to the 
constitution of the varying organism, than to the 
nature of the conditions to which it has been subjected. 

Conclusion . — In this chapter we have seen that as 
man at the present day is liable, like every other 
animal, to multiform individual differences or slight 


94 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Takt t. 


variations, so no doubt were the early progenitors of 
man ; the variations being formerly induced by the 
same general causes, and governed by the same general 
and complex laws as at present. As all animals tend 
to multiply beyond their means of subsistence, so it 
must have been with the progenitors of man ; and this 
would inevitably lead to a struggle for existence and 
to natural selection. The latter process would be 
greatly aided by the inherited effects of the increased 
use of parts, and these two processes would incessantly 
react on each other. It appears, also, as we shall 
hereafter see, that various unimportant characters have 
been acquired by man through sexual selection. An 
unexplained residuum of change must be left to the 
assumed uniform action of those unknown agencies, 
which occasionally induce strongly marked and abrupt 
deviations of structure in our domestic productions. 

Judging from the habits of savages and of the 
greater number of the Quadrumana, primeval men, and 
even their ape-like progenitors, probably lived in 
society. With strictly social animals, natural selection 
sometimes acts on the individual, through the pre- 
servation of variations which are beneficial to the 
community. A community which includes a large 
number of well -endowed individuals increases in 
number, and is victorious over other less favoured ones ; 
even although each separate member gains no advantage 
over the others of the same community. Associated 
insects have thus acquired many remarkable structures, 
which are of little or no service to the individual, such 
as the pollen-collecting apparatus, or the sting of the 
worker-bee, or the great jaws of soldier-ants. With 
the higher social animals, I am not aware that any 


Chap. II 


MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT. 


95 


structure has been modified solely for the good of the 
community, though some are of secondary service to it. 
For instance, the horns of ruminants and the great 
canine teeth of baboons appear to have been acquired 
by the males as weapons for sexual strife, but they are 
used in defence of the herd or troop. In regard to 
certain mental powers the case, as we shall see in the 
fifth chapter, is wholly different ; for these faculties 
have been chiefly, or even exclusively, gained for the 
benefit of the community, and the individuals thereof 
have at the same time gained an advantage indirectly. 

It has often been objected to such views as the fore- 
going, that man is one of the most helpless and 
defenceless creatures in the world ; and that during 
his early and less well-developed condition, he would 
have been still more helpless. The Duke of Argyll, for 
instance, insists that “ the human frame has diverged 
“ from the structure of brutes, in the direction of 
‘‘ greater physical helplessness and weakness. That is 

to say, it is a divergence which of all others it is 
“ most impossible to ascribe to mere natural selection.” 
He adduces the naked and unprotected state of the 
body, the absence of great teeth or claws for defence, 
the small strength and speed of man, and his slight 
power of discovering food or of avoiding danger by 
smell. To these deficiencies there might be added one 
still more serious, namely, that he cannot climb quickly, 
and so escape from enemies. The loss of hair would 
not have been a great injury to the inhabitants of a 
a warm country. For we know that the unclothed 
Fuegians can exist under a wretched climate. When 
‘ Primeval Man,’ 1869, p. 66. 


96 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 1 


we compare the defenceless state of man with that of 
apes, we must remember that the great canine teeth 
with which the latter are provided, are possessed in 
their full development by the males alone, and are 
chiefly used by them for fighting with their rivals ; yet 
the females, which are not thus provided, manage to 
survive. 

In regard to bodily size or strength, we do not know 
whether man is descended from some small species, 
like the chimpanzee, or from one as powerful as the 
gorilla ; and, therefore, we cannot say whether man 
has become larger and stronger, or smaller and weaker, 
than his ancestors. We should, however, bear in mind 
than an animal possessing great size, strength, and 
ferocity, and which, like the gorilla, could defend itself 
from all enemies, would not perhaps have become 
social : and this would most effectually have checked 
the acquirement of the higher mental qualities, such 
as sympathy and the love of his fellows. Hence it 
might have been an immense advantage to man to have 
sprung from some comparatively weak creature. 

The small strength and speed of man, his want of 
natural weapons, &c., are more than counterbalanced, 
firstly, by his intellectual powers, through which he 
has formed for himself weapons, tools, &c., though still 
remaining in a barbarous state, and, secondly, by his 
social qualities which lead him to give and receive aid 
from his fellow-men. No country in the world abounds 
in a greater degree with dangerous beasts than 
Southern Africa; no country presents more fearful 
physical hardships than the Arctic regions ; yet one of 
the puniest of races, that of the Bushmen, maintains 
itself in Southern Africa, as do the dwarfed Esquimaux 


Ohap. II. MANNER OP DEVELOPMENT. 97 

in the Arctic regions. The ancestors of man were, no 
doubt, inferior in intellect, and probably in social dis- 
position, to the lowest existing savages ; but it is quite 
conceivable that they might have existed, or even 
flourished, if they had advanced in intellect, whilst 
gradually losing their brute-like powers, such as that 
of climbing trees, &c. But these ancestors would not 
have been exposed to any special danger, even if far 
more helpless and defenceless than any existing savages, 
had they inhabited some warm continent or large 
island, such as Australia, New Guinea, or Borneo, which 
is now the home of the orang. And natural selection 
arising from the competition of tribe with tribe, in 
some such large area as one of these, together with the 
inherited effects of habit, would, under favourable 
conditions, have sufficed to raise man to his present 
high position in the organic scale. 


H 


98 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I 


CHAPTEE m. 

Comparison of the Mental Powers of Man and the 
Lower Animals. 

The difference in mental power between the highest ape and the 
lowest savage, immense — Certain instincts in common — The 
emotions — Curiosity— Imitation — Attention — Memory — Imagi- 
nation — Reason — Progressive improvement — Tools and weapons 
used by animals — Abstraction, self-consciousness — Language — 
Sense of Beauty — Belief in God, spiritual agencies, superstitions. 

We liave seen in the last two chapters that man bears 
in his bodily structure clear traces of his descent from 
some lower form; but it may be urged that, as man 
differs so greatly in his mental power from all other 
animals, there must be some error in this conclusion. 
No doubt the difference in this respect is enormous, 
even if we compare the mind of one of the lowest 
savages, who has no words to express any number 
higher than four, and who uses hardly any abstract 
terms for common objects or for the affections,^ with 
that of the most highly organised ape. The difference 
would, no doubt, still remain immense, even if one of 
the higher apes had been improved or civilised as much 
as a dog has been in comparison with its parent-form, 
the wolf or jackal. The Fuegians rank amongst the 
lowest barbarians ; but I was continually struck with 

^ See the evidence on those points, as given by Lubbock, ‘ Pre- 
historic Times,* p. 354, &c. 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


99 


surprise how closely the three natives on board H.M.S. 
“ Beagle,” who had lived some years in England, and 
could talk a little English, resembled us in disposition 
and in most of our mental faculties. If no organic 
being excepting man had possessed any mental power, 
or if his powers had been of a wholly different nature 
from those of the lower animals, then we should never 
have been able to convince ourselves that our high 
faculties had been gradually developed. But it can he 
shewn that there is no fundamental difference of this 
kind. We must also admit that there is a much wider 
interval in mental power between one of the lowest 
fishes, as a lamprey or lancelet, and one of the higher 
apes, than between an ape and man ; yet this interval 
is filled up by numberless gradations. 

Nor is the difference slight in moral disposition 
between a barbarian, such as the man described by the 
old navigator Byron, who dashed his child on the rocks 
for dropping a basket of sea-urchins, and a Howard or 
Clarkson ; and in intellect, between a savage who uses 
hardly any abstract terms, and a Newton or Shakspeare 
Differences of this kind between the highest men of 
the highest races and the lowest savages, are connected 
by the finest gradations. Therefore it is possible that 
they might pass and be developed into each other. 

My object in this chapter is to shew that there is no 
fundamental difference between man and the higher 
mammals in their mental faculties. Each division of 
the subject might have been extended into a separate 
essay, but mus't here be treated briefly. As no classi- 
fication of the mental powers has been universally 
accepted, I shall arrange my remarks in the order most 
convenient for my purpose ; and will select those facts 


100 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I. 


which have struck me most, with the hope that they 
may produce some effect on the reader. 

With respect to animals very low in the scale, I shall 
give some additional facts under Sexual Selection, 
shewing that their mental powers are much higher 
than might have been expected. The variability of 
the faculties in the individuals of the same species is 
an important point for us, and some few illustrations 
will here be given. But it would be superfluous to 
enter into many details on this head, for I have found 
on frequent enquiry, that it is the unanimous opinion 
of all those who have long attended to animals of many 
kinds, including birds, that the individuals differ 
greatly in every mental characteristic. In what 
manner the mental powers were first developed in the 
lowest organisms, is as hopeless an enquiry as how life 
itself first originated. These are problems for the 
distant future, if they are ever to be solved by man. 

As man possesses the same senses as the lower 
animals, his fundamental intuitions must be the same. 
Man has also some few instincts in common, as that of 
self-preservation, sexual love, the love of the mother 
for her new-born offspring, the desire possessed by the 
latter to suck, and so forth. But man, perhaps, has 
somewhat fewer instincts than those possessed by the 
animals which come next to him in the series. The 
orang in the Eastern islands, and the chimpanzee in 
Africa, build platforms on which they sleep ; and, as 
both species follow the same habit, it might be argued 
that this was due to instinct, but we cannot feel sure 
that it is not the result of both animals having similar 
wants, and possessing similar powers of reasoning. 
These apes, as we may assume, avoid the many 


Chap. IH. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


101 


poisonous fruits of the tropics, and man has no such 
knowledge : but as our domestic animals, when taken 
to foreign lands, and when first turned out in the 
spring, often eat poisonous herbs, which they after- 
wards avoid, we cannot feel sure that the apes do not 
learn from their own experience or from that of their 
parents what fruits to select. It is, however, certain, 
as we shall presently see, that apes have an instinctive 
dread of serpents, and probably of other dangerous 
animals. 

The fewness and .the comparative simplicity of the 
instincts in the higher animals are remarkable in 
contrast with those of the lower animals. Cuvier 
maintained that instinct and intelligence stand in an 
inverse ratio to each other ; and some have thought 
that the intellectual faculties of the higher animals 
have been gradually developed from their instincts. 
But Pouchet, in an interesting essay, ^ has shewn that 
no such inverse ratio really exists. Those insects 
which possess the most wonderful instincts are certainly 
the most intelligent. In the vertebrate series, the 
least intelligent members, namely fishes and amphibians, 
do not possess complex instincts ; and amongst mam- 
mals the animal most remarkable for its instincts, 
namely the beaver, is highly intelligent, as will be 
admitted by every one who has read Mr. Morgan’s 
excellent work.^ 

Although the first dawnings of intelligence, accord- 
ing to Mr. Herbert Spencer,^ have been developed 
through the multiplication and co-ordination of reflex 

* ‘ LTnstinct chez les Insec tes,’ His Works,’ 1868. 

‘ Revue des Deux Mondes,’ Feb. *‘Tbe Principles of Psycho- 
1870, p. 690. logy,’ 2nd edit. 1870, pp. 418- 

•‘The American Beaver and 443. 


102 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


actions, and although many of the simpler instincts 
graduate into reflex actions, and can hardly he dis- 
tinguished from them, as in the case of young animals 
sucking, yet the more complex instincts seem to have 
.originated independently of intelligence. I am, how- 
ever, very far from wishing to deny that instinctive 
actions may lose their fixed and untaught character, 
and he replaced by others performed by the aid of the 
free will. On the other hand, some intelligent actions, 
after being performed during several generations, 
become converted into instincts and are inherited, as 
when birds on oceanic islands learn to avoid man. 
These actions may then be said to be degraded in 
character, for they are no longer performed through 
reason or from experience. But the greater number of 
the more complex instincts appear to have been gained 
in a wholly different manner, through the natural 
selection of variations of simpler instinctive actions. 
Such variations appear to arise from the same unknown 
causes acting on the cerebral organisation, which 
induce slight variations or individual differences in 
other parts of the body ; and these variations, owing 
to our ignorance, are often said to arise spontaneously. 
We can, I think, come to no other conclusion with 
respect to the origin of the more complex instincts, 
when we reflect on the marvellous instincts of sterile 
worker-ants and bees, which leave no offspring to 
inherit the effects of experience and of modified habits. 

Although, as we learn from the above-mentioned 
insects and the heaver, a high degree of intelligence is 
certainly compatible with complex instincts, and 
although actions, at first learnt voluntarily can soon 
through habit be performed with the quickness and 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


103 


certainty of a reflex action, yet it is not improbable 
that there is a certain amount of interference between 
the development of free intelligence and of instinct, — 
which latter implies some inherited modification of the 
brain. Little is known about the functions of the 
brain, but we can perceive that as the intellectual 
powers become highly developed, the various parts of 
the brain must be connected by very intricate channels 
of the freest intercommunication ; and as a consequence 
each separate part would perhaps tend to be less well 
fitted to answer to particular sensations or associations 
in a definite and inherited — that is instinctive — manner. 
There seems even to exist some relation between a low 
degree of intelligence and a strong tendency to the 
formation of fixed, though not inherited habits ; for as 
a sagacious physician remarked to me, persons who are 
slightly imbecile tend to act in everything by routine 
or habit ; and they are rendered much happier if this is 
encouraged. 

I have thought this digression worth giving, because 
we may easily underrate the mental powers of the 
higher animals, and especially of man, when we com- 
pare their actions founded on the memory of past 
events, on foresight, reason, and imagination, with 
exactly similar actions instinctively performed by the 
lower animals ; in this latter case the capacity of per- 
forming such actions has been gained, step by step, 
through the variability of the mental organs and 
natural selection, without any conscious intelligence on 
the part of the animal during each successive genera- 
tion. No doubt, as Mr. Wallace has argued,® much of 

* ‘ Oontributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,* 1870, 

p. 212. 


10 i THE DESCENT OF MAN. Past I. 

the intelligent work done by man is due to imitation 
and not to reason ; but there is this great difference 
between his actions and many of those performed by 
the lower animals, namely, that man cannot, on his 
first trial, make, for instance, a stone hatchet or a canoe, 
through his power of imitation. He has to learn his 
work by practice; a beaver, on the other hand, can 
make its dam or canal, and a bird its nest, as well, or 
nearly as well, and a spider its wonderful web, quite as 
well,® the first time it tries as when old and ex- 
perienced. 

To return to our immediate subject : the lower 
animals, like man, manifestly feel pleasure and pain, 
happiness and misery. Happiness is never better 
exhibited than by young animals, such as puppies, 
kittens, lambs, &c., when playing together, like our 
own children. Even insects play together, as has been 
described by that excellent observer, P. Huber,’ who 
saw ants chasing and pretending to bite each other, 
like so many puppies. 

The fact that the lower animals are excited by the 
same emotions as ourselves is so well established, that 
it will not be necessary to weary the reader by many 
details. Terror acts in the same manner on them as 
on us, causing the muscles to tremble, the heart to 
palpitate, the sphincters to be relaxed, and the hair to 
stand on end. Suspicion, the offspring of fear, is 
eminently characteristic of most wild animals. It is, I 
think, impossible to read the account given by Sir E. 

• For the evidence on this Spiders,’ 1873, pd. 126, 128. 
head, see Mr. J. Traherne Mog- ’ ‘ Recherches sur les Moeurs 
gridge’s most interesting work, des Fonrmis,’ 1810, p. 173. 

* Harvesting Ants and Trap-door 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


105 


Tennent, of the behaviour of the female elephants, used 
as decoys, without admitting that they intentionally 
practise deceit, and well know what they are about. 
Courage and timidity are extremely variable qualities 
in the individuals of the same species, as is plainly seen 
in our dogs. Some dogs and horses are ill-tempered, 
and easily turn sulky ; others are good-tempered ; and 
these qualities are certainly inherited. Every one 
knows how liable animals are to furious rage, and how 
plainly they shew it. Many, and probably true, anec- 
dotes have been published on the long-delayed and 
artful revenge of various animals. The accurate 
Kengger, and Brehm ® state that the American and 
African monkeys which they kept tame, certainly 
revenged themselves. Sir Andrew Smith, a zoologist 
whose scrupulous accuracy was known to many persons, 
told me the following story of which he was himself an 
eye-witness ; at the Cape of Good Hope an officer had 
often plagued a certain baboon, and the animal, seeing 
him approaching one Sunday for parade, poured water 
into a hole and hastily made some thick mud, which he 
skilfully dashed over the officer as^ he passed by, to the 
amusement of many bystanders. For long afterwards 
the baboon rejoiced and triumphed whenever he saw 
his victim. 

The love of a dog for his master is notorious ; as an 
old writer quaintly says,® “ A dog is the only thing on 
“ this earth that luvs you more than he luvs himself.” 

" All the following statements, ‘ Thierieben,’ B. i. s. 10--87. 
given on the authority of these ® Quoted by Dr. Lauder Lind- 
two naturalists, are taken from say, in his ‘ Physiology of Mind 
Rengger’s ‘ Naturgesch. der Sau- in the Lower Animals ; ’ ‘ Jour- 
gethiere von Paraguay,’ 1830, nal of Mental Science,’ April 
s. 41-57, and from Brehm’s 1871, p. 38. 


106 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


In the agony of death a dog has been known to 
caress his master, and every one has heard of the dog 
suffering under vivisection, who licked the hand of the 
operator; this man, unless the operation was fully 
justified by an increase of our knowledge, or unless he 
had a heart of stone, must have felt remorse to the last 
hour of his life. 

As Whewell has well asked, who that reads the 
“ touching instances of maternal affection, related so 
‘‘ often of the women of all nations, and of the females 
“ of all animals, can doubt that the principle of action 
“is the same in the two cases?” We see maternal 
affection exhibited in the most trifling details; thus 
Kengger observed an American monkey (a Cehus) 
carefully driving away the flies which plagued her 
infant ; and Duvaucel saw a Hylohates washing the 
faces of her young ones in a stream. So intense is the 
grief of female monkeys for the loss of their young, 
that it invariably caused the death of certain kinds 
kept under confinement by Brehm in N. Africa. 
Orphan monkeys were always adopted and carefully 
guarded by the other monkeys, both males and females. 
One female baboon had so capacious a heart that she 
not only adopted young monkeys of other species, but 
stole young dogs and cats, which she continually carried 
about. Her kindness, however, did not go so far as to 
share her food with her adopted offspring, at which 
Brehm was surprised, as his monkeys always divided 
everything quite fairly with their own young ones. 
An adopted kitten scratched this affectionate baboon, 
who certainly had a fine intellect, for she was much 
astonished at being scratched, and immediately ex- 
* Bridgewater Treatise,* p. 263. 


/ 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


107 


amined the kitten’s feet, and without more ado hit off 
the claws. In the Zoological Gardens, I heard from 
the keeper that an old baboon {G. chacma) had adopted 
a Khesus monkey ; but when a young drill and man- 
drill were placed in the cage, she seemed to perceive 
that these monkeys, though distinct species, were her 
nearer relatives, for she at once rejected the Ehesus 
and adopted both of them. The young Ehesus, as I 
saw, was greatly discontented at being thus rejected, 
and it would, like a naughty child, annoy and attack 
the young drill and mandrill whenever it could- do so 
with safety ; this conduct exciting great indignation in 
the old baboon. Monkeys will also, according to Brehm, 
defend their master when attacked by any one, as well 
as dogs to whom they are attached, from the attacks of 
other dogs. But we here trench on the subjects of 
sympathy and fidelity, to which I shall recur. Some 
of Brehm’s monkeys took much delight in teasing a 
certain old dog whom they disliked, as well as other 
animals, in various ingenious ways. 

Most of the more complex emotions are common to 
the higher animals and ourselves. Every one has seen 
how jealous a dog is of his master’s affection, if lavished 
on any other creature ; and I have observed the same 
fact with monkeys. This shews that animals not only 
love, but have desire to be loved. Animals manifestly 
feel emulation. They love approbation or praise ; and 
a dog carrying a basket for his master exhibits in a 
high degree self-complacency or pride. There can, I 

^ A critic, without any grounds ing my work. Therefore I tried, 

(‘ Quarterly Review,’ July, 1871, and found that I could readily 

p. 72), disputes the possibility seize with my own teeth the 

of tl^ act as described by sharp little claws of a kitten 
Brehm, for the sake of discredit- nearly five weeks old. 


108 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt L 


think, be no doubt that a dog feels shame, as distinct 
from fear, and something very like modesty when 
begging too often for food. A great dog scorns the 
snarling of a little dog, and this may be called magna- 
nimity. Several observers have stated that monkeys 
certainly dislike being laughed at ; and they sometimes 
invent imaginary offences. In the Zoological Gardens 
I saw a baboon who always got into a furious rage when 
his keeper took out a letter or book and read it aloud 
to him ; and his rage was so violent that, as I witnessed 
on one occasion, he bit his own leg till the blood flowed. 
Dogs shew what may be fairly called a sense of humour, 
as distinct from mere play ; if a bit of stick or other 
such object be thrown to one, he will often carry it 
away for a short distance; and then squatting down 
with it on the ground close before him, will wait until 
his master comes quite close to take it away. The dog 
will then seize it and rush away in triumph, repeating 
the same manoeuvre, and evidently enjoying the 
practical joke. 

We will now turn to the more intellectual emotions 
and faculties, which are very important, as forming the 
basis for the development of the higher mental powers. 
Animals manifestly enjoy excitement, and suffer from 
ennui, as may be seen with dogs, and, according to 
Eengger, with monkeys. All animals feel Wonder ^ and 
many exhibit Cv/riosity. They sometimes suffer from 
this latter quality, as when the hunter plays antics and 
thus attracts them; I have witnessed this with deer, 
and so it is with the wary chamois, and with some 
kinds of wild-ducks. Brehm gives a curious account 
of the instinctive dread, which his monkeys exhibited, 
for snakes ; but their curiosity was so great that they 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


109 


conld not desist from occasionally satiating their horror 
in a most human fashion, by lifting up the lid of the 
box in which the snakes were kept. I was so much 
surprised at his account, that I took a stuffed and 
coiled-up snake into the monkey-house at the Zoological 
Gardens, and the excitement thus caused was one of the 
most curious spectacles which I ever beheld. Three 
species of Cercopithecus were the most alarmed ; they 
dashed about their cages, and uttered sharp signal cries 
of danger, which were understood by the other mon- 
keys. A few young monkeys and one old Anubis 
baboon alone took no notice of the snake. I then 
placed the stuffed specimen on the ground in one of the 
larger compartments. After a time all the monkeys 
collected round it in a large circle, and staring intently, 
presented a most ludicrous appearance. They became 
extremely ner’vous ; so that when a wooden ball, with 
which they were familiar as a plaything, was acci- 
dentally moved in the straw, under which it was partly 
hidden, they all instantly started away. These monkeys 
behaved very differently when a dead fish, a mouse,^^ a 
living turtle, and other new objects were placed in 
their cages; for though at first frightened, they soon 
approached, handled and examined them. I then 
placed a live snake in a paper bag, with the mouth 
loosely closed, in one of the larger compartments. One 
of the monkeys immediately approached, cautiously 
opened the bag a little, peeped in, and instantly dashed 
away. Then I witnessed what Brehm has described, 
for monkey after monkey, with head raised high and 
turned on one side, could not resist taking a momentary 

have given a short ac- occasion in ray ‘Expression of 
count of their behaviour on this the Emotioos,’ p. 43. 


110 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past I. 


peep into the upright bag, at the dreadful object lying 
quietly at the bottom. It would almost appear as if 
monkeys had some notion of zoological affinities, for 
those kept by Brehm exhibited a strange, though mis- 
taken, instinctive dread of innocent lizards and frogs. 
An orang, also, has been known to be much alarmed at 
the first sight of a turtle.^^ 

The principle of Imitation is strong in man, and 
especially, as I have myself observed, with savages. 
In certain morbid states of the brain this tendency is 
exaggerated to an extraordinary degree : some hemi- 
plegic patients and others, at the commencement of 
inflammatory softening of the brain, unconsciously 
imitate every word which is uttered, whether in their 
own or in a foreign language, and every gesture or 
action which is performed near them.^* Desor has 
remarked that no animal voluntarily imitates an action 
performed by man, until in the ascending scale we 
come to monkeys, which are well known to he ridiculous 
mockers. Animals, however, sometimes imitate each 
other’s actions : thus two species of wolves, which had 
been reared by dogs, learned to bark, as does sometimes 
the jackal,^® hut whether this can he called voluntary 
imitation is another question. Birds imitate the songs 
of their parents, and sometimes of other birds; and 
parrots are notorious imitators of any sound which they 
often hear. Bureau de la Malle gives an account of 

“ W. C. L. MartiD, ‘ Nat. p. 168. 

Hist, of Mammalia,’ 1841, p. “‘The Variation of Animals 
405. and Plants under Domestication,’ 

“ Dr. Bateman ‘ On Aphasia,’ vol. i. p. 27. 

1870, p. 110. ‘ Annales des Sc. Nat.’ (1st 

“ Quoted by Vogt, ‘ Memoire Series), tom. xxii. p. 397. 
sur les Microcephales,’ 1867, 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


Ill 


a dog reared by a cat, who learnt to imitate the well- 
known action of a cat licking her paws, and thus 
washing her ears and face ; this was also witnessed by 
the celebrated naturalist Audouin. I have received 
several confirmatory accounts ; in one of these, a dog 
had not been suckled by a cat, but had been brought 
up with one, together with kittens, and had thus 
acquired the above habit, which he ever afterwards 
practised during his life of thirteen years. Bureau de 
la Malle’s dog likewise learnt from the kittens to play 
with a ball by rolling it about with his fore paws, and 
springing on it. A correspondent assures me that a 
cat in his house used to put her paws into jugs of milk 
having too narrow a mouth for her head. A kitten of 
this cat soon learned the same trick, and practised it 
ever afterwards, whenever there was an opportunity. 

The parents of many animals, trusting to the 
principle of imitation in their young, and more 
especially to their instinctive or inherited tendencies, 
may be said to educate them. We see this when a cat 
brings a live mouse to her kittens ; and Bureau de la 
Malle has given a curious account (in the paper above 
quoted) of his observations on hawks which taught 
their young dexterity, as well as judgment of dis- 
tances, by first dropping through the air dead mice 
and sparrows, which the young generally failed to 
catch, and then bringing them live birds and letting 
them loose. 

Hardly any faculty is more important for the in- 
tellectual progress of man than Attention. Animals 
clearly manifest this power, as when a cat watches by 
a hole and prepares to spring on its prey. Wild 
animals sometimes become so absorbed when thus 


112 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Pabt L 


engaged, that they may be easily approached. Mr. 
Bartlett has given me a curious proof how variable 
this faculty is in monkeys. A man who trains 
monkeys to act in plays, used to purchase common 
kinds from the Zoological Society at the price of five 
pounds for each ; but he offered to give double the 
price, if he might keep three or four of them for a few 
days, in order to select one. When asked how he 
could possibly learn so soon, whether a particular 
monkey would turn out a good actor, he answered that 
it all depended on their power of attention. If when 
he was talking and explaining anything to a monkey, 
its attention was easily distracted, as by a fly on the 
wall or other trifling object, the case was hopeless. If 
he tried by punishment to make an inattentive monkey 
act, it turned sulky. On the other hand, a monkey 
which carefully attended to him could always be 
trained. 

It is almost superfluous to state that animals have 
excellent Memories for persons and places. A baboon 
at the Cape of Good Hope, as I have been informed by 
Sir Andrew Smith, recognised him with joy after an 
absence of nine months. I had a dog who was savage 
and averse to all strangers, and I purposely tried his 
memory after an absence of five years and two days. 
I went near the stable where he lived, and shouted to 
him in my old manner ; he shewed no joy, but 
instantly followed me out walking, and obeyed me, 
exactly as if I had parted with him only half an hour 
before. A train of old associations, dormant duriog 
five years, had thus been instantaneously awakened in 
his mind. Even ants, as P. Huber has clearly 
‘ lies Moeurs des Pourmis,’ 1810, p. 150. 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWEES. 


113 


Bhewn, recognised their fellow-ants belonging to the 
same community after a separation of four months. 
Animals can certainly by some means judge of the 
intervals of time between recurrent events. 

The Imagination is one of the highest prerogatives 
of man. By this faculty he unites former images and 
ideas, independently of the will, and thus creates 
brilliant and novel results. A poet, as Jean Paul 
Kichter remarks,^® “ who must reflect whether he shall 
“ make a character say yes or no — to the devil with 
“ him ; he is only a stupid corpse.” Dreaming gives 
us the best notion of this power ; as Jean Paul again 
says, “ The dream is an involuntary art of poetry.” 
The value of the products of our imagination depends 
of course on the number, accuracy, and clearness of 
our impressions, on our judgment and taste in 
selecting or rejecting the involuntary combinations, 
and to a certain extent on our power of voluntarily 
combining them. As dogs, cats, horses, and probably 
all the higher animals, even birds have vivid dreams, 
and this is shewn by their movements and the sounds 
uttered, we must admit that they possess some power 
of imagination. There must be something special, 
which causes dogs to howl in the night, and especially 
during moonlight, in that remarkable and melancholy 
manner called baying. All dogs do not do so ; and, 
according to Houzeau,^^ they do not then look at the 
moon, but at some fixed point near the horizon. 


Quoted in Dr. Mandsley’s 
‘ Physiology and Pathology of 
Mind; 1868, pp. 19, 220. 

^ Dr. Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ 
vol. i. 1862, p. xxi. Houzeau 
says that his parokeets and 


canary-birds dreamt : ‘ Facultes 
Mentales,’ tom. ii. p. 136. 

‘ Facultes Mentales des 
Animaux,’ 1872, tom. ii. p. 
181, 


I 


114 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


Houzeau thinks that their imaginations are disturbed 
by the vague outlines of the surrounding objects, and 
conjure up before them fantastic images : if this be so, 
their feelings may almost be called superstitious. 

Of all the faculties of the human mind, it will, I 
presume, be admitted that Reason stands at the 
summit. Only a few persons now dispute that 
animals possess some power of reasoning. Animals 
may constantly be seen to pause, deliberate, and 
resolve. It is a significant fact, that the more the 
habits of any particular animal are studied by a 
naturalist, the more he attributes to reason and the 
less to unlearnt instincts.^^ In future chapters we 
shall see that some animals extremely low in the scale 
apparently display a certain amount of reason. No 
doubt it is often difficult to distinguish between the 
power of reason and that of instinct. For instance, 
Dr. Hayes, in his work on ‘The Open Polar Sea,’ 
repeatedly remarks that his dogs, instead of continuing 
to draw the sledges in a compact body, diverged and 
separated when they came to thin ice, so that their 
weight might be more evenly distributed. This was 
often the first warning which the travellers received 
that the ice was becoming thin and dangerous. Now, 
did the dogs act thus from the experience of each 
individual, or from the example of the older and wiser 
dogs, or from an inherited habit, that is from instinct ? 
This instinct, may possibly have arisen since the time, 
long ago, when dogs were first employed by the natives 
in drawing their sledges ; or the Arctic wolves, the 

^ Mr. L. H. Morgan’s work thinking, however, that he goes 
on ‘ The American Beaver,’ too far in underrating the power 
1868 , ofl'ers a good illustration of instinct, 
of this remark. I cannot help 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


115 


parent-stock of the Esquimaux dog, may have acquired 
an instinct impelling them not to attack their prey in 
a close pack, when on thin ice. 

We can only judge by the circumstances under 
which actions are performed, whether they are due to 
instinct, or to reason, or to the mere association of 
ideas : this latter principle, however, is intimately 
connected with reason. A curious case has been given 
by Prof. Mobius,^® of a pike, separated by a plate of 
glass from an adjoining aquarium stocked with fish, 
and who often dashed himself with such violence 
against the glass in trying to catch the other fishes, 
that he was sometimes completely stunned. The pike 
went on thus for three months, but at last learnt 
caution, and ceased to do so. The plate of glass was 
then removed, hut the pike would not attack these 
particular fishes, though he would devour others which 
were afterwards introduced ; so strongly was the idea 
of a violent shock associated in his feeble mind with 
^ the attempt on his former neighbours. If a savage, 
who had never seen a large plate-glass window, were 
to dash himself even once against it, he would for a 
long time afterwards associate a shock with a window- 
frame ; but very diff'erently from the pike, he would 
probably reflect on the nature of the impediment, and 
be cautious under analogous circumstances. Now with 
! monkeys, as we shall presently see, a painful or merely 
a disagreeable impression, from an action once per- 
formed, is sometimes sufficient to prevent the animal 
I from repeating it. If we attribute this difference 

' between the monkey and the pike solely to the 

association of ideas being so much stronger and more 
® ‘Die Bewegungen der Thiere,’ &c., 1873, p. 11. 


116 


TEE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


persistent in the one than the other, though the pike 
often received much the more severe injury, can we 
maintain in the case of man that a similar difference 
implies the possession of a fundamentally different 
mind? 

Houzeau relates that, whilst crossing a wide and 
arid plain in Texas, his two dogs suffered greatly from 
thirst, and that between thirty and forty times they 
rushed down the hollows to search for water. These 
hollows were not valleys, and there were no trees in 
them, or any other difference in the vegetation, and as 
they were absolutely dry there could have been no 
smell of damp earth. The dogs behaved as if they 
knew that a dip in the ground offered them the best 
chance of finding water, and Houzeau has often 
witnessed the same behaviour in other animals. 

I have seen, as I daresay have others, that when a 
small object is thrown on the ground beyond the reach 
of one of the elephants in the Zoological Gardens, he 
blows through his trunk on the ground beyond the 
object, so that the current reflected on all sides may 
drive the object within his reach. Again a well- 
known ethnologist, Mr. Westropp, informs me that he 
observed in Vienna a hear deliberately making with 
his paw a current in some water, which was close to 
the bars of his cage, so as to draw a piece of floating 
bread within his reach. These actions of the elephant 
and bear can hardly be attributed to instinct or 
inherited habit, as they would he of little use to an 
animal in a state of nature. Now, what is the 
difference between such actions, when performed by an 
uncultivated man, and by one of the higher animals ? 

* Facult^s Mentales des Animaux,’ 1872, tom. ii. p. 265. 


Ohaf. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


117 


The savage and the dog have often found water at a 
low level, and the coincidence under such circum- 
stances has become associated in their minds. A 
cultivated man would perhaps make some general 
proposition on the subject ; but from all that we 
know of savages it is extremely doubtful whether they 
would do so, and a dog certainly would not. But a 
savage, as well as a dog, would search in the same way, 
though frequently disappointed ; and in both it seems 
to be equally an act of reason, whether or not any 
general proposition on the subject is consciously 
placed before the mind.^® The same would apply to 
the elephant and the bear making currents in the air 
or water. The savage would certainly neither know 
nor care by what law the desired movements were 
effected ; yet his act would be guided by a rude 
process of reasoning, as surely as would a philosopher 
in his longest chain of deductions. There would no 
doubt be this difference between him and one of the 
higher animals, that he would take notice of much 
slighter circumstances and conditions, and would 
observe any connection between them after much less 
experience, and this would be of paramount import- 
ance. I kept a daily record of the actions of one of 
my infants, and when he was about eleven months old, 
and before he could speak a single word, I was con- 
tinually struck with the greater quickness, with which 
all sorts of objects and sounds were associated to- 

“ Prof. Huxley has analysed his article, ‘Mr. Darwin’s Critics,* 
with admirable clearness the in the ‘ Contemporary Review,* 
mental steps by which a man, Nov. 1871, p. 462, and in his 
as well as a dog, arrives at a ‘ Critiques and Essays,’ 1873, p. 
conclusion in a case analogous 279. 
to that given in my text. See 


118 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part I. 


gether in his mind, compared with that of the most 
intelligent dogs I ever knew. But the higher animals 
differ in exactly the same way in this power of associa- 
tion from those low in the scale, such as the pike, as 
well as in that of drawing inferences and of obser- 
vation. 

The promptings of reason, after very short ex- 
perience, are well shewn by the following actions of 
American monkeys, which stand low in their order. 
Eengger, a most careful observer, states that when he 
first gave eggs to his monkeys in Paraguay, they 
smashed them, and thus lost much of their contents ; 
afterwards they gently hit one end against some hard 
body, and picked off the bits of shell with their fingers. 
After cutting themselves only once with any sharp 
tool, they would not touch it again, or would handle 
it with the greatest caution. Lumps of sugar were 
often given them wrapped up in paper ; and Kengger 
sometimes put a live wasp in the paper, so that in 
hastily unfolding it they got stung ; after this had once 
happened, they always first held the packet to their 
ears to detect any movement within.^® 

The following cases relate to dogs. Mr. Colquhoun^^ 
winged two wild-ducks, which fell on the further side 
of a stream ; his retriever tried to bring over both at 
once, but could not succeed ; she then, though never 
before known to ruftie a feather, deliberately killed 
one, brought over the other, and returned for the dead 

Mr. Belt, in his most in- animal possessed some reasoning 
teresting work, ‘ The Naturalist power. 

in Nicaragua,’ 1874 (p. 119), ‘ The Moor and the Loch,’ 

likewise describes various actions p. 45. Col. Hutchinson on 
of a tamed Cebus, which, I ‘ Dog Breaking,’ 1850, p. 46. 
think, clearly shew that this 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


119 


bird. Col. Hutchinson relates that two partridges were 
shot at once, one being killed, the other wounded ; the 
latter ran away, and was caught by the retriever, who 
on her return came across the dead bird ; “ she 
“ stopped, evidently greatly puzzled, and after one or 
“ two trials, finding she could not take it up without 
permitting the escape of the winged bird, she con- 
sidered a moment, then deliberately murdered it by 
“ giving it a severe crunch, and afterwards brought 
“ away both together. This was the only known 
“ instance of her ever having wilfully injured any 
“game.” Here we have reason though not quite 
perfect, for the retriever might have brought the 
wounded bird first and then returned for the dead 
one, as in the case of the two wild-ducks. I give the 
above cases, as resting on the evidence of two inde- 
pendent witnesses, and because in both instances the 
retrievers, after deliberation, broke through a habit 
which is inherited by them (that of not killing the 
game retrieved), and because they shew how strong 
their reasoning faculty must have been to overcome a 
fixed habit. 

I will conclude by quoting a remark by the il- 
lustrious Humboldt.^® “ The muleteers in S. America 
“say, ‘I will not give you the mule whose step is 
“ ‘ easiest, but la mas racional , — the one that reasons 
“ ‘ best ; ’ ” and as he adds, “ this popular expression, 
“ dictated by long experience, combats the system of 
“ animated machines, better perhaps than all the argu- 
“ments of speculative philosophy.” Nevertheless 
some writers even yet deny that the higher animals 
possess a trace of reason ; and they endeavour to 
‘ Personal Narrative,’ Eng. translat., vol. iii. p. 106. 


120 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


explain away, by what appears to be mere verbiage,^® 
all such facts as those above given. 

It has, I think, now been shewn that man and the 
higher animals, especially the Primates, have some few 
instincts in common. All have the same senses, 
intuitions, and sensations, — similar passions, affec- 
tions, and emotions, even the more complex ones, such 
as jealousy, suspicion, emulation, gratitude, and mag- 
nanimity ; they practise deceit and are revengeful ; 
they are sometimes susceptible to ridicule, and even 
have a sense of humour ; they feel wonder and 
curiosity ; they possess the same faculties of imita- 
tion, attention, deliberation, choice, memory, imagina- 
tion, the association of ideas, and reason, though in 
very different degrees. The individuals of the same 
species graduate in intellect from absolute imbecility 
to high excellence. They are also liable to insanity, 
though far less often than in the case of man.®® 
Nevertheless, many authors have insisted that man is 
divided by an insuperable barrier from all the lower 
animals in his mental faculties. I formerly made a 
collection of above a score of such aphorisms, but they 


^ I am glad to find that so 
acute a reasoner as Mr. Leslie 
Stephen (‘ Darwinism and Di- 
vinity, Essays on Free-thinking,’ 
1873, p. 80), in speaking ot the 
supposed impassable barrier be- 
tween the minds of man and the 
lower animals, says, “ The dis- 
“ Unctions, indeed, which have 
“ been drawn, seem to us to rest 
“ upon no better foundation 
“ than a great many other 
“metaphysical distinctions; 
“ that is, the assumption that 
“ because you can give two 


“things different names, they 
“must therefore have different 
“ natures. It is difficult to 
“ understand how anybody who 
“ has ever kept a dog, or seen 
“an elephant, can have any 
“ doubts as to an animal’s 
“power of performing the 
“essential processes of reasou- 
“ ing.” 

See ‘ Madness in Animals,’ 
by Dr. W. Lauder Lindsay, in 
‘Journal of Mental Science,’ 
July 1871. 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


121 


are almost worthless, as their wide difference and 
number prove the difficulty, if not the impossibility, 
of the attempt. It has been asserted that man alone 
is capable of progressive improvement ; that he alone 
makes use of tools or fire, domesticates other animals, 
or possesses property ; that no animal has the power 
of abstraction, or of forming general concepts, is self- 
conscious and comprehends itself; that no animal 
employs language ; that man alone has a sense of 
beauty, is liable to caprice, has the feeling of gratitude, 
mystery, &c. ; believes in Grod, or is endowed with a 
conscience. I will hazard a few remarks on the more 
important and interesting of these points. 

Archbishop Sumner formerly maintained that man 
alone is capable of progressive improvement. That he 
is capable of incomparably greater and more rapid 
improvement than is any other animal, admits of no 
dispute; and this is mainly due to his power of 
speaking and handing down his acquired knowledge. 
With animals, looking first to the individual, every 
one who has had any experience in setting traps, 
knows that young animals can be caught much more 
easily than old ones; and they can be much more 
easily approached by an enemy. Even with respect 
to old animals, it is impossible to catch many in the 
same place and in the same kind of trap, or to destroy 
them by the same kind of poison ; yet it is improbable 
that all should have partaken of the poison, and 
impossible that all should have been caught in a trap. 
They must learn caution by seeing' their brethren 
caught or poisoned. In North America, where the fur- 
bearing animals have long been pursued, they exhibit, 
“ Quoted by Sir C. Lyell, ‘ Antiquity of Man,* p. 497. 


122 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Past I. 


according to the unanimous testimony of all observers, 
an almost incredible amount of sagacity, caution and 
cunning ; but trapping has been there so long carried 
on, that inheritance may possibly have come into play. 
J have received several accounts that when telegraphs 
are first set up in any district, many birds kill them- 
selves by flying against the wires, but that in the 
course of a very few years they learn to avoid this 
danger, by seeing, as it would appear, their comrades 
killed.3^ 

If we look to successive generations, or to the race, 
there is no doubt that birds and other animals gradu- 
ally both acquire and lose caution in relation to man 
or other enemies and this caution is certainly in 
chief part an inherited habit or instinct, but in part 
the result of individual experience. A good observer, 
Leroy,^^ states, that in districts where foxes are much 
bunted, the young, on first leaving their burrows, are 
incontestably much more wary than the old ones in 
districts where they are not much disturbed. 

Our domestic dogs are descended from wolves and 
jackals,^® and though they may not have gained in 
cunning, and may have lost in wariness and suspicion, 
yet they have progressed in certain moral qualities, 
such as in aflection, trust- worthiness, temper, and pro- 
bably in general intelligence. The common rat has 
conquered and beaten several other species throughout 

“ For additional evidence, with ‘ Origin of Species,’ 5th ed. p. 260. 

details, see M. Houzeau, ‘ Les ^ ‘ Lettres Phil, sur I’lntelli- 
Facult^s Mentaless’ tom. ii. gence des Animaux,’ nouvelle 

1872, p. 147. ^ edit. 1802, p. 86. 

See, with respect to birds ^ See the evidence on this 
on oceanic islands, my ‘ Journal head in chap. i. vol. i. ‘ On the 
of Researches during the voyage Variation of Animals and Plants 
of the “ Beagle,” * 1845, p. 398. under Domestication.’ 


Chap. III. 


MKNTAL POWERS. 


123 


Enrope, in parts of North America, New Zealand, and 
recently in Formosa, as well as on the mainland of 
China. Mr. Swinhoe,^* who describes these two latter 
cases, attributes the victory of the common rat over 
the large Mus coninga to its superior cunning ; and 
this latter quality may probably be attributed to the 
habitual exercise of all its faculties in avoiding extir- 
pation by man, as well as to nearly all the less cunning 
or weak-minded rats having been continuously de- 
stroyed by’ him. It is, however, possible that the 
success of the common rat may be due to its having 
possessed greater cunning than its fellow-species, 
before it became associated with man. To maintain, 
independently of any direct evidence, that no animal 
during the course of ages has progressed in intellect 
or other mental faculties, is to beg the question of the 
evolution of species. We have seen that, according to 
Lartet, existing mammals belonging to several orders 
have larger brains than their ancient tertiary proto- 
types. 

It has often been said that no animal uses any tool ; 
but the chimpanzee in a state of nature cracks a 
native fruit, somewhat like a walnut, with a stone.®’ 
Kengger easily taught an American monkey thus to 
break open hard palm-nuts ; and afterwards of its own 
accord, it used stones to open other kinds of nuts, as 
well as boxes. It thus also removed the soft rind of 
fruit that had a disagreeable flavour. Another monkey 
was taught to open the lid of a large box with a stick, 

** ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1864, vol. iv. 1843-44, p. 383. 
p. 186. ‘ Saugethiere von Para- 

Savage and Wyman in guay,’ 1830, s. 51-56. 

‘Boston Journal of Nat. Hist.’ 


124 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I 


and afterwards it used the stick as a lever to move 
heavy bodies ; and I have myself seen a young orang 
put a stick into a crevice, slip his hand to the other 
end, and use it in the proper manner as a lever. The 
tamed elephants in India are well known to break off 
branches of trees and use them to drive away the flies ; 
and this same act has been observed in an elephant in 
a state of nature.^® I have seen a young orang, when 
she thought she was going to be whipped, cover and 
protect herself with a blanket or straw. In these 
several cases stones and sticks were employed as 
implements ; but they are likewise used as weapons. 
Brehm^° states, on the authority of the well-known 
traveller Schimper, that in Abyssinia when the 
baboons belonging to one species (G. gelada) descend 
in troops from the mountains to plunder the fields, 
they sometimes encounter troops of another species 
((7. hamadryas), and then a fight ensues. The Geladas 
roll down great stones, which the Hamadryas try to 
avoid, and then both species, making a great uproar, 
rush furiously against each other. Brehm, when, 
accompanying the Duke of Coburg-Gotha, aided in 
an attack with fire-arms on a troop of baboons 
in the pass of Mensa in Abyssinia. The baboons in 
return roiled so many stones down the mountain, some 
as large as a man’s head, that the attackers had to 
beat a hasty retreat ; and the pass was actually closed 
for a time against the caravan. It deserves notice 
that these baboons thus acted in concert. Mr. 
Wallace on three occasions saw female orangs, ac- 

39 The ‘ Indian Field,’ March ‘ The Malay Archipelago,* 

4, 1871. voL i. 1869, p. 87. 

*0 ‘ Thierleben,’ B. i. s. 79, 82. 


Ohap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


125 


companied by tbeir young, “ breaking off branches and 
“ the great spiny fruit of the Durian tree, with every 
“ appearance of rage ; causing such a shower of 
“ missiles as effectually kept us from approaching too 
“ near the tree.” As I have repeatedly seen, a 
chimpanzee will throw any object at hand at a person 
who offends him ; and the before-mentioned baboon at 
the Cape of Good Hope prepared mud for the purpose. 

In the Zoological Gardens, a monkey, which had 
weak teeth, used to break open nuts with a stone ; 
and I was assured by the keepers that after using the 
stone, he hid it in the straw, and would not let any 
other monkey touch it. Here, then, we have the idea 
of property; but this idea is common to every dog 
with a bone, and to most or all birds with their nests. 

The Duke of Argyll remarks, that the fashioning 
of an implement for a special purpose is absolutely 
peculiar to man ; and he considers that this forms an 
immeasurable gulf between him and the brutes. This 
is no doubt a very important distinction ; but there 
appears to me much truth in Sir J. Lubbock’s sugges- 
tion,^® that when primeval man first used fiint- 
stones for any purpose, he would have accidentally 
splintered them, and would then have used the sharp 
fragments. From this step it would be a small one to 
break the flints on purpose, and not a very wide step 
to fashion them rudely. This latter advance, however; 
may have taken long ages, if we may judge by the 
immense interval of time which elapsed before the men 
of the neolithic period took to grinding and polishing 
their stone tools. In breaking the flints, as Sir J. 

^ * Primeval Man,’ 1869, pp. ‘ Prehistoric Times,’ 1865, 

145, 147. p. 473, &c. 


126 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


Lubbock likewise remarks, sparks would have been 
emitted, and in grinding them heat would have been 
evolved : thus the two usual methods of “ obtaining 
fire may have originated.” The nature of fire would 
have been known in the many volcanic regions where 
lava occasionally flows through forests. The anthropo- 
morphous apes, guided probably by instinct, build for 
themselves temporary platforms; but as many in- 
stincts are largely controlled by reason, the simpler 
ones, such as this of building a platform, might readily 
pass into a voluntary and conscious act. The orang is 
known to cover itself at night with the leaves of the 
Pandanus ; and Brehm states that one of his baboons 
used to protect itself from the heat of the sun by 
throwing a straw-mat over its head. In these several 
habits, we probably see the first steps towards some of 
the simpler arts, such as rude architecture and dress, 
as they arose amongst the early progenitors of man. 

Abstraction^ General Gonceftions, Self-consciousness^ 
Mental Individuality, — It would be very difficult for 
any one with even much more knowledge than I 
possess, to determine how far animals exhibit any 
traces of these high mental powers. This difficulty 
arises from the impossibility of judging what passes 
through the mind of an animal ; and again, the fact 
that writers differ to a great extent in the meaning 
which they attribute to the above terms, causes a 
further difficulty. If one may judge from various 
articles which have been published lately, the greatest 
stress seems to be laid on the supposed entire absence 
in animals of the power of abstraction, or of forming 
general concepts. But when a dog sees another dog 
at a distance, it is often clear that he perceives that it 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


127 


is a dog in the abstract ; for when he gets nearer his 
whole manner suddenly changes, if the other dog be a 
friend. A recent writer remarks, that in all such 
cases it is a pure assumption to assert that the mental 
act is not essentially of the same nature in the animal 
as in man. If either refers what he perceives with his 
senses to a mental concept, then so do both.^^ When 
I say to my terrier, in an eager voice (and I have 
made the trial many times), “ Hi, hi, where is it ? ” 
she at once takes it as a sign that something is to be 
hunted, and generally first looks quickly all around, 
and then rushes into the nearest thicket, to scent for 
any game, but finding nothing, she looks up into any 
neighbouring tree for a squirrel. Now do not these 
actions clearly shew that she had in her mind a general 
idea or concept that some animal is to be discovered and 
hunted ? 

It may be freely admitted that no animal is self- 
conscious, if by this term it is implied, that he reflects 
on such points, as whence he comes or whither he will 
go, or what is life and death, and so forth. But how 
can we feel sure that an old dog with an excellent 
memory and some power of imagination, as shewn by 
his dreams, never reflects on his past pleasures or 
pains in the chase ? And this would be a form of 
self-consciousness. On the other hand, as Buchner 
has remarked, how little can the hard- worked wife of a 
degraded Australian savage, who uses very few abstract 
words, and cannot count above four, exert her self- 
consciousness, or reflect on the nature of her own 

** Mr. Hookham, in a letter ‘ Conferences sur la Thdorie 

to Prof. Max Miiller, in the Darwinienne,’ French trauslat, 
‘Birmingham News,’ May 1873. 1869, p. 132. 


128 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


existence. It is generally admitted, that the higher 
animals possess memory, attention, association, and 
even some imagination and reason. If these powers, 
which differ much in different animals, are capable of 
improvement, there seems no great improbability in 
more complex faculties, such as the higher forms of 
abstraction, and self-consciousness, &c., having been 
evolved through the development and combination of 
the simpler ones. It has been urged against the views 
here maintained that it is impossible to say at what point 
in the ascending scale animals become capable of abstrac- 
tion, &c. ; but who can say at what age this occurs in our 
young children? We see at least that such powers are 
developed in children by imperceptible degrees. 

That animals retain their mental individuality is 
unquestionable. When my voice awakened a train of 
old associations in the mind of the before-mentioned 
dog, he must have retained his mental individuality, 
although every atom of his brain had probably under- 
gone change more than once during the interval of 
five years. This dog might have brought forward the 
argument lately advanced to crush all evolutionists, 
and said, “I abide amid all mental moods and all 
“ material changes. . . . The teaching that atoms leave 
‘‘ their impressions as legacies to other atoms falling 
“ into the places they have vacated is contradictory of 
“ the utterance of consciousness, and is therefore false ; 
“ but it is the teaching necessitated by evolutionism, 
“ consequently the hypothesis is a false one.” 

Language . — This faculty has justly been considered 
as one of the chief distinctions between man and the 
lower animals. But man, as a highly competent 
^ The Eev. Dr. J. M‘Cann, ‘ Anti-Darwinism,’ 1869, p. 13. 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


129 


judge, Archbishop Whately remarks, “ is not the 
“ only animal that can make use of language to 
“ express what is passing in his mind, and can under- 
“ stand, more or less, what is so expressed by 
“ another.” In Paraguay the Cehus azarse when 
excited utters at least six distinct sounds, which 
excite in other monkeys similar emotions.'^® The 
movements of the features and gestures of monkeys 
are understood by us, and they partly understand 
ours, as Kengger and others declare. It is a more 
remarkable fact that the dog, since being domesticated, 
has learnt to bark^® in at least four or five distinct 
tones. Although barking is a new art, no doubt the 
wild parent-species of the dog expressed their feelings 
by cries of various kinds. With the domesticated dog 
we have the bark of eagerness, as in the chase ; that 
of anger, as well as growling ; the yelp or howl of 
despair, as when shut up ; the baying at night ; the 
bark of joy, as when starting on a walk with his 
master ; and the very distinct one of demand or 
supplication, as when wishing for a door or window 
to be opened. According to Houzeau, who paid 
particular attention to the subject, the domestic 
fowl utters at least a dozen significant sounds.®® 

The habitual use of articulate language is, however, 
peculiar to man ; but he uses, in common with the lower 
animals, inarticulate cries to express his meaning, 
aided by gestures and the movements of the muscles of 
the face.®^ This especially holds good with the more 

Quoted in ‘ Anthropological cation,’ vol. i. p. 27. 

Review,’ 1864, p. 158. ^ ‘ Facult^s Men tales des 

** Rengger, ibid. s. 45. Aniniaux,’ tom. ii. 1872, p. 

^ See my ‘Variation of Ani- 346-349. 

Oials and Plants under Domesti- See a discussion on this 


130 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I 


simple and vivid feelings, whicli are but little con- 
nected with our higher intelligence. Our cries of pain, 
fear, surprise, anger, together with the their appro- 
priate actions, and the murmur of a mother to her 
' beloved child, are more expressive than any words. 
That which distinguishes man from the lower animals 
is not the understanding of articulate sounds, for, as 
every one knows, dogs understand many words and 
sentences. In this respect they are at the same stage 
of development as infants, between the ages of ten and 
twelve months, who understand many words and short 
sentences, but cannot yet utter a single word. It is 
not the mere articulation which is our distinguishing 
character, for parrots and other birds possess this 
power. Nor is it the mere capacity of connecting 
definite sounds with definite ideas; for it is certain 
that some parrots, which have been taught to speak, 
connect unerringly words with things, and persons 
with events.®^ The lower animals differ from man 


subject in Mr. E. B. Tylor’s 
very interesting work, ‘ Re- 
searches into the Early History 
of Mankind,’ 1865, chaps, ii. to 
iv. 

I have received several 
detailed accounts to this effect. 
Admiral Sir B. J. Sulivan, whom 
I know to be a careful observer, 
assures me that an African 
parrot, long kept in his father’s 
house, invariably called certain 
persons of the household, as 
well as visitors, by their names. 
He said “good morning” to 
every one at breakfast, and 
“ go^ night ” to each as they 
left the room at night, and 
never reversed these salutations. 


To Sir B. J. Sulivan’s father, he 
used to add to the “ good morn- 
ing” a short sentence, which 
was never once repeated after 
his father’s death. He scolded 
violently a strange dog which 
came into the room through the 
open window; and he scolded 
another parrot (saying “ you 
naughty polly ”) which had got 
out of its cage, and was eating 
apples on the kitchen table. 
See also, to the same effect, 
Houzeau on parrots, ‘Facult^s 
Mentales,’ tom. ii. p. 309. Dr. 
A. Moschkau informs me that 
he knew a starling which never 
made a mistake in saying in 
German “ goc*d morning ” to 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWEKS. 


131 


solely in his almost infinitely larger power of associa- 
ting together the most diversified sounds and ideas ; 
and this obviously depends on the high development 
of his mental powers. 

As Horne Tooke, one of the founders of the noble 
science of philology, observes, language is an art, like 
brewing or baking ; but writing would have been a 
better simile. It certainly is not a true instinct, for 
every language has to be learnt. It differs, however, 
widely from all ordinary arts, for man has an instinc- 
tive tendency to speak, as we see in the babble of our 
young children ; whilst no child has an instinctive 
tendency to brew, bake, or write. Moreover, no 
philologist now supposes that any language has been 
deliberately invented ; it has been slowly and uncon- 
sciously developed by many steps.®® The sounds 
uttered by birds offer in several respects the nearest 
analogy to language, for all the members of the same 
species utter the same instinctive cries expressive of 
their emotions; and all the kinds which sing, exert 
their power instinctively ; but the actual song, and even 
the call-notes, are learnt from their parents or foster^ 
parents. These sounds, as Daines Barrington®^ has 
proved, ‘‘ are no more innate than language is in man.” 


persons arriving, and “ good 
bye, old fellow,” to those depart- 
ing. I could add several other 
such cases. 

® See some good remarks on 
this head by Prof. Whitney, in 
his ‘ Oriental and Linguistic 
Studies,’ 1873, p. 354. He 

observes that the desire of 
communication between man is 
the living force, which, in the 
development of language, “ works 


“both consciously and uncon- 
“ sciously ; consciously as re- 
“gards the immediate end to 
“ be attained ; unconsciously as 
“ regards the further conse- 
“ quences of the act.” 

Hon. Daines Barrington in 
‘ Philosoph. Transactions,’ 1773, 
p. 262. See also Dureau de la 
Malle, in ‘Ann. des. Sc. Nat.’ 
3rd series. Zoolog. tom. x. p. 
119. 


132 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


The first attempts to sing may be compared to the 
“ imperfect endeavour in a child to babble.” The 
young males continue practising, or as the bird- 
catchers say, “ recording,” for ten or eleven months. 
Their first essays show hardly a rudiment of the future 
song ; but as they grow older we can perceive what 
they are aiming at ; and at last they are said “ to sing 
“ their song round.” Nestlings which have learnt the 
song of a distinct species, as with the canary-birds 
educated in the Tyrol, teach and transmit their new 
song to their offspring. The slight natural "differences 
of song in the same species inhabiting different 
districts may be appositely compared, as Barrington 
remarks, “ to provincial dialects ; ” and the songs of 
allied, though distinct species may be compared with 
the languages of distinct races of man. I have given 
the foregoing details to shew that an instinctive 
tendency to acquire an art is not peculiar to man. 

With respect to the origin of articulate language, 
after having read on the one side the highly interest- 
ing works of Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, the Bev. F. 
Farrar, and Prof. Schleicher,®® and the celebrated 
lectures of Prof. Max Muller on the other side, I can- 
not doubt that language owes its origin to the imitation 
and modification of various natural sounds, the voices 
of other animals, and man’s own instinctive cries, aided 
by signs and gestures. When we treat of sexual 

“ ‘On the Origin of 1865, p. 190. The work on 
Language,’ by H. Wedgwood, this subject, by the late Prof. 
1866. ‘ Chapters on Language,’ Aug. Schleicher, has been trans- 
by the Rev. P. W. Farrar, 1865. lated by Dr. Bikkers into 
These works are most interest- English, under the title of 

ing. See also ‘ De la Phys. et ‘ Darwinism tested by the 

de Parole,’ par Albert Lemoine, Science of Language,’ 1869. 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


133 


selection we shall see that primeval man, or rather 
some early progenitor of man, probably first used his 
voice in producing true musical cadences, that is in 
singing, as do some of the gibbon-apes at the present 
day; and we may conclude from a widely-spread 
analogy, that this power would have been especially 
exerted during the courtship of the sexes, — would have 
expressed various emotions, such as love, jealousy, 
triumph, — and would have served as a challenge to 
rivals. It is, therefore, probable that the imitation of 
musical cries by articulate sounds may have given 
rise to words expressive of various complex emotions. 
The strong tendency in our nearest allies, the monkeys, 
in microcephalous idiots,®® and in the barbarous races of 
mankind, to imitate whatever they hear deserves notice, 
as bearing on the subject of imitation. Since monkeys 
certainly understand much that is said to them by 
man, and when wild, utter signal-cries of danger to 
their fellows ; and since fowls give distinct warnings 
for danger on the ground, or in the sky from hawks 
(both, as well as a third cry, intelligible to dogs),®® may 
not some unusually wise ape-like animal have imitated 
the growl of a beast of prey, and thus told his fellow- 
monkeys the nature of the expected danger ? This would 
have been a first step in the formation of a language. 

As the voice was used more and more, the vocal 
organs would have been strengthened and perfected 
through the principle of the inherited efiects of use ; 

“ Vogt, ‘M^moire sur les quoted, by Brehm and Rengger. 
Microcephales,’ 1867, p. 169. “ Houzeau gives a very 

With respect to savages, I have curious account of his observa- 
given some facts in my ‘ Journal tions on this subject in his 
of Researches,* &c., 1845, p. 206. ‘ Facult4s Mentales des Ani- 

See clear evidence on this maux,’ tom. ii. p. 348. 
bead in the two works so often 


134 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 1. 


and this would have reacted on the power of speech. 
But the relation between the continued use of language 
and the development of the brain, has no doubt been 
to more important. The mental powers in some 
early progenitor of man must have been more highly 
developed than in any existing ape, before even the 
most imperfect form of speech could have come into 
use ; but we may confidently believe that the continued 
use and advancement of this power would have reacted 
on the mind itself, by enabling and encouraging 
it to carry on long trains of thought. A complex 
train of thought can no more he carried on with- 
out the aid of words, whether spoken or silent, 
than a long calculation without the use of figures or 
algebra. It appears, also, that even an ordinary train 
of thought almost requires, or is greatly facilitated by 
some form of language, for the dumb, deaf, and blind 
girl, Laura Bridgman, was observed to use her fingers 
whilst dreaming.*^® Nevertheless, a long succession of 
vivid and connected ideas may pass through the mind 
without the aid of any form of language, as we may 
infer from the movements of dogs during their dreams. 
We have, also, seen that animals are able to reason to 
a certain extent, manifestly without the aid of language. 
The intimate connection between the brain, as it is 
now developed in us, and the faculty of speech, is well 
shewn by those curious cases of brain-disease in which 
speech is specially affected, as when the power to 
remember substantives is lost, whilst other words can 
be correctly used, or where substantives of a certain 
class, or all except the initial letters of substantives 

^ See remarks on this head logy and Pathology of Mind,’ 
by Dr. Maudsley, ‘ The Physio- 2nd edit. 1868, p. 199. 


Chap. Ul. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


135 


and proper names are forgotten. There is no more 
improbability in the continued use of the mental and 
vocal organs leading to inherited changes in their 
structure and functions, than in the case of hand- 
writing, which depends partly on the form of the hand 
and partly on the disposition of the mind ; and hand- 
writing is certainly inherited.®^ 

Several writers, more especially Prof. Max Muller,®^ 
have lately insisted that the use of language implies 
the power of forming general concepts ; and that as no 
animals are supposed to possess this power, an 
impassable barrier is formed between them and man.®® 
With respect to animals, I have already endeavoured 


Many curious cases have 
been recorded. See, for instance, 
Dr. Bateman ‘ On Aphasia,’ 
1870, p. 27, 31, 53, 100, &c. 
Also, ‘ Inquiries Concerning the 
Intellectual Powers,’ by Dr. 
Abercrombie, 1838, p. 150. 

‘ The Variation of Animals 
;and Plants under Domestication,’ 
vol. ii. p. 6. 

Lectures on ‘ Mr. Darwin’s 
Philosophy of Language,’ 1873. 

The judgment of a distin- 
guished philologist, such as 
Prof. Whitney, will have far 
more weight on this point than 
anything that I can say. He 
remarks (‘ Oriental and Lin- 
guistic Studies,’ 1873, p. 297), 
in speaking of Bleek’s views; 
“ Because on the grand scale 
“language is the necessary 
“ auxiliary of thought, indis- 
“peusable to the development 
“of the power of thinking, to 
“the distinctness and variety 
“ and complexity of cogni- 
“ tions to the full mastery 


“ of consciousness ; therefore he 
“ would fain make thought 
“absolutely impossible without 
“ speech, identifying the faculty 
“ with its instrument. He 
“ naight just as reasonably assert 
“ that the human hand cannot 
“ act without a tool. With such 
“ a doctrine to start from, he 
“cannot stop short of Muller’s 
“ worst paradoxes, that an 
“ infant (in fans, not speaking) 
“ is not a human being, and that 
“ deaf-mutes do not become 
“ possessed of reason until they 
“learn to twist their fingers 
“ into imitation of spoken 
“ words.” Max Muller j>ives in 
italics (‘Lectures on Mr. Dar- 
win’s Philosophy of Language,’ 
1873, third lecture) the follow- 
ing aphorism : “ There is no 
“ thought without words, as 
“ little as there are words with- 
“ out thought.” What a strange 
definition must here be given to 
the word thought I 


136 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


to shew that they have this power, at least in a rude 
and incipient degree. As far as concerns infants of 
from ten to eleven months old, and deaf-mutes, it 
seems to me incredible, that they should be able to 
connect certain sounds with certain general ideas as 
quickly as they do, unless such ideas were already 
formed in their minds. The same remark may be 
extended to the more intelligent animals ; as Mr. 
Leslie Stephen observes,®^ “ A dog frames a general 
“concept of cats or sheep, and knows the correspond - 
“ ing words as well as a philosopher. And the capacity 
“ to understand is as good a proof of vocal intelligence, 
“ though in an inferior degree, as the capacity to speak.” 
Why the organs now used for speech should have 
been originally perfected for this purpose, rather than 
any other organs, it is not difficult to see. Ants have 
considerable powers of intercommunication by means 
of their antennae, as shewn by Huber, who devotes 
a whole chapter to their language. We might have 
used our fingers as efficient instruments, for a person 
with practice can report to a deaf man every word of a 
speech rapidly delivered at a public meeting ; but the 
loss of our hands, whilst thus employed, would have been 
a serious inconvenience. As all the higher mammals 
possess vocal organs, constructed on the same general 
plan as ours, and used as a means of communication, it 
was obviously probable that these same organs would 
be still further developed if the power of communica- 
tion had to be improved ; and this has been effected by 
the aid of adjoining and well adapted parts, namely the 
tongue and lips.®® The fact of the higher apes not 

Essays on Free-thinking,’ this effect by Dr. Maudsley, 
&c., 1873, p. 82. ‘The Physiology and Pathology 

^ See some good remarks to of Mind,’ 1868, p. 199. 


Chap. Ill 


MENTAL POWERS. 


137 


using their vocal organs for speech, no doubt depends 
on their intelligence not having been sufficiently 
advanced. The possession by them of organs, which 
with long-continued practice might have been used for 
speech, although not thus used, is paralleled by the 
case of many birds which possess organs fitted for 
singing, though they never sing. Thus, the nightin- 
gale and crow have vocal organs similarly constructed, 
these being used by the former for diversified song, and 
by the latter only for croaking.®® If it be asked why 
apes have not had their intellects developed to the 
same degree as that of man, general causes only can 
be assigned in answer, and it is unreasonable to expect 
anything more definite, considering our ignorance 
with respect to the successive stages of development 
through which each creature has passed. 

The formation of different languages and of distinct 
species, and the proofs that both have been developed 
through a gradual process, are curiously parallel.®^ 
S But we can trace the formation of many words further 
back than that of species, for we can perceive how they 
actually arose from the imitation of various sounds. 
We find in distinct languages striking homologies 
due to community of descent, and analogies due to 
a similar process of formation. The manner in which 


Macgillivray, ‘ Hist, of 
British Birds,’ vol. ii. 1839, p. 
29. An excellent observer, M r. 
Black wall, remarks that the 
magpie learns to pronounce 
single words, and even short 
sentences, more readily than 
almost any other British bird ; 
yet, as he adds, after long and 
closely investigating its habits, 
he has never known it, in a state 


of nature, display any unusual 
capacity for imitation. ‘ Re- 
searches in Zoology,’ 1834, p. 
158. 

See the very interesting 
parallelism between the develop- 
ment of species and languages, 
given by Sir 0. Lyell in ‘ The 
Grcolog. Evidences of the Anti- 
quity of Man,’ 1863, chap, 
xxiii. 


138 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


certain letters or sounds change when others change is 
very like correlated growth. We have in both cases 
the reduplication of parts, the effects of long-continned 
use, and so forth. The frequent presence of rudi- 
ments, both in languages and in species, is still more 
remarkable. The letter m in the word am, means 1 ; 
so that in the expression I am, a superfluous and use- 
less rudiment has been retained. In the spelling also 
of words, letters often remain as the rudiments of 
ancient forms of pronunciation. Languages, like 
organic beings, can be classed in groups under groups ; 
and they can be classed either naturally according to 
descent, or artificially by other characters. Dominant 
languages and dialects spread widely, and lead to the 
gradual extinction of other tongues. A language, like 
a species, when once extinct, never, as Sir 0. Lyell 
remarks, reappears. The same language never has 
two birth-places. Distinct languages may be crossed 
or blended together.®® We see variability in every 
tongue, and new words are continually cropping up ; 
but as there is a limit to the powers of the memory, 
single words, like whole languages, gradually become 
extinct. As Max Muller has well remarked : — ‘‘ A 
“ struggle for life is constantly going on amongst the 
“ words and grammatical forms in each language. The 
“better, the shorter, the easier forms are constantly 
“ gaining the upper hand, and they owe their success to 
“ their own inherent virtue.” To these more important 
causes of the survival of certain words, mere novelty 
and fashion may be added ; for there is in the mind of 

See remarks to this effect * Nature,’ March 24tb, 1870, p. 
by the Rev. F. W. Farrar, in an 528. 

interesting article, entitled “‘Nature,’ Jan. 6th, 1870, 
‘ Philology and Darwinism,’ in p. 257. 


Chap. HI. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


139 


man a strong love for slight changes in all things. The 
survival or preservation of certain favoured words 
in the struggle for existence is natural selection. 

The perfectly regular and wonderfully complex con- 
struction of the languages of many barbarous nations 
has often been advanced as a proof, either of the divine 
origin of these languages, or of the high art and 
former civilisation of their founders. Thus F. von 
Schlegel writes: “In those languages which appear 
“ to be at the lowest grade of intellectual culture, 
“ we frequently observe a very high and elaborate 
“ degree of art in their grammatical structure. This 
“ is especially the case with the Basque and the 
“ Lapponian, and many of the American languages.” 
But it is assuredly an error to speak of any language 
as an art, in the sense of its having been elaborately 
and methodically formed. Philologists now admit that 
conjugations, declensions, &c., originally existed as 
distinct words, since joined together ; and as such 
words express the most obvious relations between 
objects and persons, it is not surprising that they 
should have been used by the men of most races 
during the earliest ages. With respect to perfection, 
the following illustration will best shew how easily we 
may err : a Crinoid sometimes consists of no less than 
150,000 pieces of shell,’^ all arranged with perfect 
symmetry in radiating lines ; but a naturalist does not 
consider an animal of this kind as more perfect than a 
bilateral one with comparatively few parts, and with 
none of these parts alike, excepting on the opposite 

Quoted by 0. S. Wake, Buck! and, ‘ Bridgewater 

‘ Chapters on Man,’ 1868, p. Treatise,’ p. 411. 

101 . 


140 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past L 


sides of the body. He justly considers the differentia- 
tion and specialisation of organs as the test of per- 
fection. So with languages : the most symmetrical and 
complex ought not to he ranked above irregular, abbre- 
viated, and bastardised languages, which have borrowed 
expressive words and useful forms of construction from 
various conquering, conquered, or immigrant races. 

From these few and imperfect remarks I conclude 
that the extremely complex and regular construction 
of many barbarous languages, is no proof that they owe 
their origin to a special act of creation.’^ Nor, as we 
have seen, does the faculty of articulate speech in 
itself offer any insuperable objection to the belief that 
man has been developed from some lower form. 

Sense of Beauty . — This sense has been declared to be 
peculiar to man. I refer here only to the pleasure 
given by certain colours, forms, and sounds, and which 
may fairly be called a sense of the beautiful; with 
cultivated men such sensations are, however, intimately 
associated with complex ideas and trains of thought. 
When we behold a male bird elaborately displaying his 
graceful plumes or splendid colours before the female, 
whilst other birds, not thus decorated, make no such 
display, it is impossible to doubt that she admires the 
beauty of her male partner. As women everywhere 
deck themselves with these plumes, the beauty of such 
ornaments cannot be disputed. As we shall see later, 
the nests of humming-birds, and the playing passages 
of bower-birds are tastefully ornamented with gaily- 
coloured objects ; and this shews that they must receive 
some kind of pleasure from the sight of such things. 

See some good remarks on by Sir J. Lubbock, ‘ Origin of 
the simplification of laoguages, Civilisation, 1870, p. 278. 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


141 


With the great majority of animals, however, the taste 
for the beautiful is confined, as far as we can judge, to 
the attractions of the opposite sex. The sweet strains 
poured forth by many male birds during the season of 
love, are certainly admired by the females, of which 
fact evidence will hereafter be given. If female birds 
had been incapable of appreciating the beautiful 
colours, the ornaments, and voices of their male 
partners, all the labour and anxiety exhibited by the 
latter in displaying their charms before the females 
would have been thrown away ; and this it is impos- 
sible to admit. Why certain bright colours should 
excite pleasure cannot, I presume, be explained, any 
more than why certain flavours and scents are agreeable ; 
but habit has something to do with the result, for that 
which is at first unpleasant to our senses, ultimately 
becomes pleasant, and habits are inherited. With 
respect to sounds, Helmholtz has explained to a certain 
extent on physiological principles, why harmonies and 
certain cadences are agreeable. But besides this, sounds 
frequently recurring at irregular intervals are highly 
disagreeable, as every one will admit who has listened 
at night to the irregular flapping of a rope on board 
ship. The same principle seems to come into play 
•with vision, as the eye prefers symmetry or figures 
with some regular recurrence. Patterns of this kind 
are employed by even the lowest savages as ornaments ; 
and they have been developed through sexual selection 
for the adornment of some male animals. Whether 
we can or not give any reason for the pleasure thus 
derived from vision and hearing, yet man and many of 
the lower animals are alike pleased by the same colours, 
graceful shading and forms, and the same sounds. 


142 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I. 


The taste for the beautiful, at least as far as female 
beauty is concerned, is not of a special nature in the 
human mind; for it differs widely in the different 
races of man, and is not quite the same even in the 
different nations of the same race. Judging from the 
hideous ornaments, and the equally hideous music 
admired by most savages, it might be urged that their 
aesthetic faculty was not so highly developed as in 
certain animals, for instance, as in birds. Obviously 
no animal would be capable of admiring such scenes as 
the heavens at night, a beautiful landscape, or refined 
music ; but such high tastes are acquired through 
culture, and depend on complex associations ; they are 
not enjoyed by barbarians or by uneducated persons. 

Many of the faculties, which have been of inestima- 
ble service to man for his progressive advancement, 
such as the powers of the imagination, wonder, 
curiosity, an undefined sense of beauty, a tendency 
to imitation, and the love of excitement or novelty, 
could hardly fail to lead to capricious changes of 
customs and fashions. I have alluded to this point, 
because a recent writer’^ has oddly fixed on Caprice 
as one of the most remarkable and typical difierences 
“ between savages and brutes.” But not only can we 
partially understand how it is that man is from various' 
conflicting influences rendered capricious, but that the 
lower animals are, as we shall hereafter see, likewise 
capricious in their affections, aversions, and sense of 
beauty. There is also reason to suspect that they love 
novelty, for its own sake. 

Belief in God — Religion . — There is no evidence that 
‘ The Spectator,’ Dec. 4th, 1869, p. 1430, 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL TOWERS. 


143 


man was aboriginally endowed with the ennobling 
belief in the existence of an Omnipotent God. On tbe 
contrary there is ample evidence, derived not from 
hasty travellers, but from men who have long resided 
with savages, that numerous races have existed, and 
still exist, who have no idea of one or more gods, and 
who have no words in their languages to express such 
an idea.’^ The question is of course wholly distinct 
from that higher one, whether there exists a Creator 
and Kuler of the universe ; and this has been answered 
in the affirmative by some of the highest intellects that 
have ever existed. 

If, however, we include under the term religion ” 
the belief in unseen or spiritual agencies, the case is 
wholly different ; for this belief seems to be universal 
with the less civilised races. Nor is it difficult to 
comprehend how it arose. As soon as the important 
faculties of the imagination, wonder, and curiosity, 
together with some power of reasoning, had become 
partially developed, man would naturally crave to 
understand what was passing around him, and would 
have vaguely speculated on his own existence. As 
Mr. M’Lennan has remarked, “ Some explanation of 
‘‘ the phenomena of life, a man must feign for himself, 
“ and to judge from the universality of it, the simplest 
“ hypothesis, and the first to occur to men, seems to 
“ have been that natural phenomena are ascribable to 

See an excellent article on especially the chapters on Re- 
this subject by the Rev. F. W. ligion in his ‘ Origin of Civilisa- 
Farrar, in the ‘ Anthropological tion,’ 1870. 

Review,’ Aug. 1864, p. ccxvii. * The Worship of Animals 

For further facts see Sir J. and Plants,’ in the ‘ Fortnightly 
Lubbock, ‘Prehistoric Times,’ Review,’ Oct. 1, 1869, p. 422, 
2nd edit. 1869, p. 564; and 


144 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


“ tlie presence in animals, plants, and things, and in 
“ the forces of nature, of such spirits prompting to 
“ action as men are conscious they themselves possess.’ 
It is also probable, as Mr. Tylor has shewn, that 
dreams may have first given rise to the notion of 
spirits ; for savages do not readily distinguish between 
subjective and objective impressions. When a savage 
dreams, the figures which appear before him are 
believed to have come from a distance, and to stand 
over him ; or “ the soul of the dreamer goes out on its 
“ travels, and comes home with a remembrance of 
“ what it has seen.” But until the faculties of 


imagination, curiosity, reason, &c., had been fairly 
well developed in the mind of man, his dreams would 
not have led him to believe in spirits, any more than 
in the case of a dog. 

The tendency in savages to imagine that natural 


objects and agencies are 
living essences, is perhaps 

Tylor, ‘ Early History of 
Mankind,’ 1865, p. 6. See also 
the three striking chapters on 
the Development of Religion, in 
Lubbock’s ‘ Origin of Civilisa- 
tion,’ 1870. In a like manner 
Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his in- 
genious essay in the ‘ Fort- 
nightly Review ’ (May 1st, 1870, 
p. 535), accounts for the earliest 
forms of religious belief through- 
out the world, by man being 
led through dreams, shadows, 
and other causes, to look at 
himself as a double essence, 
corporeal and spiritual. As the 
spiritual being is supposed to 
exist after death and to be 
powerful, it is propitiated by 
various gifts and ceremonies, 


animated by spiritual or 
illustrated by a little fact 

and its aid invoked. He then 
further shews that names or 
nicknames given from some 
animal or other object, to the 
early progenitors or founders of 
a tribe, are supposed after a 
long interval to represent the 
real progenitor of the tribe ; and 
such animal or object is then 
naturally believed still to exist 
as a spirit, is held sacred, and 
worshipped as a god. Never- 
theless I cannot but suspect 
that there is a still earlier and 
ruder stage, when anything 
which manifests power or move- 
ment is thought to be endowed 
with some form of life, and with 
mental faculties analogous to our 
owu. 


Chap. III. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


146 


which I once noticed : my dog, a full-grown and very 
sensible animal, was lying on the lawn during a hot 
and still day ; but at a little distance a slight breeze 
occasionally moved an open parasol, which would have 
been wholly disregarded by the dog, had any one stood 
near it. As it was, every time that the parasol slightly 
moved, the dog growled fiercely and barked. He 
must, I think, have reasoned to himself in a rapid 
and unconscious manner, that movement without any 
apparent cause indicated the presence of some strange 
living agent, and that no stranger had a right to be on 
his territory. 

The belief in spiritual agencies would easily pass 
into the belief in the existence of one or more gods. 
For savages would naturally attribute to spirits the 
same passions, the same love of vengeance or simplest 
form of justice, and the same affections which they 
themselves feel. The Fuegians appear to be in this 
respect in an intermediate condition, for when the 
surgeon on board the Beagle ” shot some young 
ducklings as specimens, York Minster declared in the 
most solemn manner, “ Oh, Mr. Bynoe, much rain, 
“ much snow, blow much ; ” and this was evidently 
a retributive punishment for wasting human food. So 
again he related how, when his brother killed a “ wild 
“ man,” storms long raged, much rain and snow fell. 
Yet we could never discover that the Fuegians believed 
in what we should call a Hod, or practised any religious 
rites; and Jemmy Button, with justifiable pride, 
stoutly maintained that there was no devil in his land. 
This latter assertion is the more remarkable, as with 
savages the belief in bad spirits is far more common 
than that in good ones. 


L 


146 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt 1. 


The feeling of religious devotion is a highly complex 
one, consisting of love, complete submission to an 
exalted and mysterious superior, a strong sense of 
dependence,’’ fear, reverence, gratitude, hope for the 
future, and perhaps other elements. No being could 
experience so complex an emotion until advanced in 
his intellectual and moral faculties to at least a 
moderately high level. Nevertheless, we see some 
distant approach to this state of mind in the deep love 
of a dog for his master, associated with complete sub- 
mission, some fear, and perhaps other feelings. The 
behaviour of a dog when returning to his master after 
an absence, and, as I may add, of a monkey to his 
beloved keeper, is widely different from that towards 
their fellows. In the latter case the transports of joy 
appear to be somewhat less, and the sense of equality 
is shewn in every action. Professor Braubach goes so 
far as to maintain that a dog looks on his master as on 
a god.’® 

The same high mental faculties which first led man 
to believe in unseen spiritual agencies, then in 
fetishism, polytheism, and ultimately in monotheism, 
would infallibly lead him, as long as his reasoning 
powers remained poorly developed, to various strange 
superstitions and customs. Many of these are terrible 
to think of — such as the sacrifice of human beings to a 
blood-loving god ; the trial of innocent persons by the 
ordeal of poison or fire ; witchcraft, &c. — yet it is well 

See an able article on the Darwin’schen Art-Lehre,’ 1869, 
‘ Physical Elements of Keligion,’ s. 53. It is said (Dr. W. Lauder 
by Mr. L. Owen Pike, in ‘ An- Lindsay, * Journal of Mental 
thropolog. Keview,’ April, 1870, Science,’ 1871, p. 43), that 

p. Ixiii. Bacon long ago, and the poet 

‘ Religion, Moral, &c., der Burns, held the same notion. 


Ohap. IU. 


MENTAL POWERS. 


147 


occasionally to reflect on these superstitions, for they 
shew us what an infinite debt of gratitude we owe to 
the improvement of our reason, to science, and to our 
accumulated knowledge. As Sir J. Lubbock has well 
observed, it is not too much fco say that the horrible 
‘‘ dread of unknown evil hangs like a thick cloud over 
“ savage life, and embitters every pleasure/’ These 
miserable and indirect consequences of our highest 
faculties may be compared with the incidental and 
occasional mistakes of the instincts of the lower 
animals. 

‘ Prehistoric Times,* 2nd excellent account of the many 
edit. p. 571. In this work (p. strange and capricious customs 
571) there wiU he found an of savages. 


148 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt L 


CHAPTEE IV. 

Comparison op the Mental Powers op Man and 
THE Lower Animals — continued. 

The moral sense — Fundamental proposition — The qualities of social 
animals — Origin of sociability — Struggle between opposed 
instincts — Man a social animal — The more enduring social 
instincts conquer other less persistent instincts — The social 
virtues alone regarded by savages — The self-regarding virtues 
acquired at a later stage of development — The importance of 
the judgment of the members of the same community on 
conduct — Transmission of moral tendencies — Summary. 

I FULLY subscribe to tbe judgment of those writers' 
who maintain that of all the differences between man 
and the lower animals, the moral sense or conscience is 
by far the most important. This sense, as Mackintosh^ 
remarks, “has a rightful supremacy over every other 
“ principle of human action ; ” it is summed up in that 
short but imperious word oughty so full of high 
significance. It is the most noble of all the attributes 
of man, leading him without a moment’s hesitation to 
risk his life for that of a fellow-creature ; or after due 
deliberation, impelled simply by the deep feeling of 
right or duty, to sacrifice it in some great cause. 
Immanuel Kant exclaims, “ Duty ! Wondrous thought, 
“ that workest neither by fond insinuation, flattery, 
“ nor by any threat, but merely by holding up thy 

* See, for instance, on this &c. 
subject, Quatrefages, ‘Unite de ^ ‘Dissertation on Ethical 
I’Esp^ce Humaine,* 1861, p. 21, Philosophy,’ 1837, p. 231, &c. 


Ohap. rv. 


MOKAL SENSE. 


149 


“ naked law in the soul, and so extorting for thyself 
“ always reverence, if not always obedience ; before 
‘‘ whom all appetites are dumb, however secretly they 
‘‘ rebel ; whence thy original ? ” ® 

This great question has been discussed by many 
writers* of consummate ability; and my sole excuse 
for touching on it, is the impossibility of here passing 
it over; and because, as far as I know, no one has 
approached it exclusively from the side of natural 
history. The investigation possesses, also, some in- 
dependent interest, as an attempt to see how far the 
study of the lower animals throws light on one of the 
highest psychical faculties of man. 

The following proposition seems to me in a high 
degree probable — namely, that any animal whatever, 
endowed with well-marked social instincts,® the pa- 


^ ‘ Metaphysics of EtMcs,’ 
translated by J. W. Semple, 
Edinburgh,’ 1836, p. 136. 

* Mr. Bain gives a list ( ‘ Men- 
tal and Moral Science,’ 1868, p. 
543-725) of twenty-six British 
authors who have written on 
this subject, and whose names 
are famihar to every reader ; to 
these, Mr. Bain’s own name, 
and those of Mr. Lecky, Mr. 
Shadworth Hodgson, Sir J. 
Lubbock, and others, might be 
added. 

® Sir B. Brodie, after observing 
that man is a social animal 
( ‘ Psychological Enquiries,’ 1854, 
p. 192), asks the pregnant ques- 
tion, “ought not this to settle 
“ the disputed question as to 
*• the existence of a moral 
“sense?” Similar ideas have 
probably occurred to many per- 
sons, as they did long ago to 


Marcus Aurelius. Mr. J. S. Mill 
speaks, in his celebrated work, 
* Utilitarianism,’ (1864, pp. 45, 
46), of the social feelings as a 
“powerful natural sentiment,” 
and as “the natural basis of 
“sentiment for utilitarian mo- 
“ rality.” Again he says, “ Like 
“the other acquired capacities 
“above referred to, the moral 
“faculty, if not a part of our 
“ nature, is a natural out-growth 
“from it; capable, like them, 
“in a certain small degree of 
“springing up spontaneously.” 
But in opposition to all this, he 
also remarks, “ if, as is my own 
“belief, the moral feelings are 
“ not innate, but acquired, they 
“are not for that reason less 
“ natural.” It is with hesitation 
that I venture to differ at all 
from so profound a thinker, but 
it can hardly be disputed that 


150 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I. 


rental and filial alfections being here included, would 
inevitably acquire a moral sense or conscience, as soon 
as its intellectual powers had become as well, or nearly 
as well developed, as in man. For, firstly, the social 
instincts lead an animal to take pleasure in the society 
of its fellows, to feel a certain amount of sympathy 
with them, and to perform various services for them. 
The services may be of a definite and evidently in- 
stinctive nature; or there may be only a wish and 
readiness, as with most of the higher social animals, 
to aid their fellows in certain general ways. But 
these feelings and services are by no means extended 
to all the individuals of the same species, only to those 
of the same association. Secondly, as soon as the 
mental faculties had become highly developed, images 
of all past actions and motives would be incessantly 
passing through the brain of each individual ; and 
that feeling of dissatisfaction, or even misery, which 
invariably results, as we shall hereafter see, from any 
unsatisfied instinct, would arise, as often as it was 
perceived that the enduring and always present social 
instinct had yielded to some other instinct, at the time 
stronger, but neither enduring in its nature, nor 
leaving behind it a very vivid impression. It is clear 
that many instinctive desires, such as that of hunger. 


the social feelings are instinctive 
or innate in the lower animals ; 
and why should they not be so 
in man? Mr. Bain (see, for 
instance, ‘The Emotions and 
the Will,’ 1865, p. 481) and 
others believe that the moral 
sense is acquired by each in- 
dividual during his lifetime. 


On the general theory of evolu- 
tion this is at least extremely 
improbable. The ignoring of 
all transmitted mental qualities 
will, as it seems to me, be here- 
after judged as a most serious 
blemish in the works of Mr. 
Mill 


Ohap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


151 


are in their nature of short duration ; and after being 
satisfied, are not readily or vividly recalled. Thirdly, 
after the power of language had been acquired, and 
the wishes of the community could be expressed, the 
common opinion how each member ought to act for 
the public good, would naturally become in a para- 
mount degree the guide to action. But it should be 
borne in mind that however great weight we may 
attribute to public opinion, our regard for the appro- 
bation and disapprobation of our fellows depends on 
sympathy, which, as we shall see, forms an essential 
part of the social instinct, and is indeed its foundation- 
stone. Lastly, habit in the individual would ultimately 
play a very important part in guiding the conduct of 
each member ; for the social instinct, together with sym- 
pathy, is, like any other instinct, greatly strengthened 
by habit, and so consequently would be obedience to 
the wishes and judgment of the community. These 
several subordinate propositions must now be discussed, 
and some of them at considerable length. 

It may be well first to premise that I do not wish to 
maintain that any strictly social animal, if its in- 
tellectual faculties were to become as active and as 
highly developed as in man, would acquire exactly the 
same moral sense as ours. In the same manner as 
various animals have some sense of beauty, though 
they admire widely different objects, so they might 
have a sense of right and wrong, though led by it 
to follow widely different lines of conduct. If, for 
instance, to take an extreme case, men were reared 
under precisely the same conditions as hive-bees, there 
can hardly be a doubt that our unmarried females 
would, like the worker-bees, think it a sacred duty to 


152 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I. 


kill their brothers, and mothers would strive to kill 
their fertile daughters; and no one would think of 
interfering.® Nevertheless, the bee, or any other 
social animal, would gain in our supposed case, as it 
appears to me, some feeling of right or wrong, or a 
conscience. For each individual would have an inward 
sense of possessing certain stronger or more enduring 
instincts, and others less strong or enduring; so that 
there would often he a struggle as to which impulse 
should be followed ; and satisfaction, dissatisfaction, or 
even misery would be felt, as past impressions were 
compared during their incessant passage through the 
mind. In this case an inward monitor would tell the 
animal that it would have been better to have followed 
the one impulse rather than the other. The one 
course ought to have been followed, and the other 
ought not ; the one would have been right and the 
other wrong ; but to these terms I shall recur. 


• Mr. H. Sidgwick remarks, 
in an able discussion on this 
subject (the ‘Academy,* June 
15th, 1872, p. 231), “ a superior 
“ bee, we may feel sure, would 
“ aspire to a milder solution 
“of the population question.” 
Judging, however, from the 
habits of many or most savages, 
man solves the problem by fe- 
male infanticide, polyandry and 
promiscuous intercourse ; there- 
fore it may well be doubted 
whether it would be by a milder 
method. Miss Cobbe, in com- 
menting (‘Darwinism in Morals,’ 
‘ Theological Keview,’ April, 
1872, p. 188-191) on the same 
illustration, says, the principles 
of social duty would be thus 
reversed; and by this, I pre- 


sume, she means that the fulfil- 
ment of a social duty would tend 
to the injury of individuals ; 
but she oveilooks the fact, 
which she would doubtless ad- 
mit, that the instincts of the 
bee have been acquired for the 
good of the community. She 
goes so far as to say that if the 
theory of ethics advocated in 
this chapter were ever generally 
accepted, “ I cannot but believe 
“ that in the hour of their 
“ triumph would be sounded 
“ the knell of the virtue of 
mankind 1 ” It is to be hoped 
that the behef in the perma- 
nence of virtue on this earth is 
not held by many persons on so 
weak a tenure. 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


153 


Sociability , — Animals of many kinds are social; we 
find even distinct species living together ; for example, 
some American monkeys ; and united flocks of rooks, 
jackdaws, and starlings. Man shews the same feeling 
in his strong love for the dog, which the dog returns 
with interest. Every one must have noticed how 
miserable horses, dogs, sheep, &c., are when separated 
from their companions, and what strong mutual 
affection the two former kinds, at least, shew on their 
reunion. It is curious to speculate on the feelings of 
a dog, who will rest peacefully for hours in a room 
with his master or any of the family, without the least 
notice being taken of him ; but if left for a short time 
by himself, barks or howls dismally. We will confine 
our attention to the higher social animals ; and pass 
over insects, although some of these are social, and aid 
one another in many important ways. The most 
common mutual service in the higher animals is to 
warn one another of danger by means of the united 
senses of all. Every sportsman knows, as Dr. Jaeger 
remarks,’ how difficult it is to approach animals in a 
herd or troop. Wild horses and cattle do not, I 
believe, make any danger-signal; but the attitude of 
any one of them who first discovers an enemy, warns 
the others. Rabbits stamp loudly on the ground with 
their hind- feet as a signal : sheep and chamois do the 
same with their forefeet, uttering likewise a whistle. 
Many birds, and some mammals, post sentinels, which 
in the case of seals are said ® generally to be the 
females. The leader of a troop of monkeys acts as the 
sentinel, and utters cries expressive both of danger and 

’ ‘ Die Darwin’sche Theorie,’ • Mr. R. Brown in ‘ Proc. 
8. 101. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1868, p. 409, 


154 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


of safety.® Social animals perform many little services 
for each other : horses nibble, and cows lick each other, 
on any spot which itches : monkeys search each other 
for external parasites; and Brehm states that after 
a' troop of the Gercopithecus griseo-viridis has rushed 
through a thorny brake, each monkey stretches itself 
on a branch, and another monkey sitting by, ‘^con- 
scientiously ” examines its fur, and extracts every 
thorn or burr. 

Animals also render more important services to one 
another : thus wolves and some other beasts of prey 
hunt in packs, and aid one another in attacking their 
victims. Pelicans fish in concert. The Hamadryas 
baboons turn over stones to find insects, &c. ; and 
when they come to a large one, as many as can stand 
round, turn it over together and share the booty. 
Social animals mutually defend each other. Bull 
bisons in N. America, when there is danger, drive the 
cows and calves into the middle of the herd, whilst 
they defend the outside, I shall also in a future 
chapter give an account of two young wild bulls at 
Chillingham attacking an old one in concert, and of 
two stallions together trying to drive away a third 
stallion from a troop of mares. In Abyssinia, Brehm 
encountered a great troop of baboons who were crossing 
a valley ; some had already ascended the opposite 
mountain, and some were still in the valley : the latter 


® Brelmi, ‘ Thierleben,’ B. i. 
1864, s. 52, 79. For the case 
of the monkeys extracting thorns 
from each other, see s. 54. With 
respect to the Hamadryas turn- 
ing over stones, the fact is given 
(s. 76) on the evidence of 


Alvarez, whose observations 
Brehm thinks quite trustworthy. 
For the cases of the old male 
baboons attacking the dogs, see 
s. 79 ; and with respect to the 
eagle, s. 56. 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


165 


were attacked by the dogs, but the old males im- 
mediately hurried down from the rocks, and with 
mouths widely opened, roared so fearfully, that the 
dogs quickly drew back. They were again encouraged 
to the attack ; but by this time all the baboons had 
reascended the heights, excepting a young one, about 
six months old, who, loudly calling for aid, climbed on 
a block of rock, and was surrounded. Now one of the 
largest males, a true hero, came down again from the 
mountain, slowly went to the young one, coaxed him, 
and triumphantly led him away — the dogs being too 
much astonished to make an attack. I cannot resist 
giving another scene which was witnessed by this 
same naturalist ; an eagle seized a young Cercopithe- 
cus, which, by clinging to a branch, was not at once 
carried off ; it cried loudly for assistance, upon which 
the other members of the troop, with much uproar, 
rushed to the rescue, surrounded the eagle, and pulled 
out so many feathers, that he no longer thought of his 
prey, but only how to escape. This eagle, as Brehm 
remarks, assuredly would never again attack a single 
monkey of a troop.^° 

It is certain that associated animals have a feeling 
of love for each other, which is not felt by non-social 
adult animals. How far in most cases they actually 
sympathise in the pains and pleasures of others, is 
more doubtful, especially with respect to pleasures. 

Mr. Belt gives the case of face to face ; and Mr. Belt 
a spider-monkey (Ateles) in believes, from what he has seen 
Nicaragua, which was heard of the habits of these monkeys, 
screaming for nearly two hours that they protect themselves 
in the forest, and was found with from eagles by keeping two or 
an eagle perched close by it. three together. ‘ The Natura- 
The bird apparently feared to list in Nicaragua,’ 1874, p. 118. 
attack as long as it remained 


156 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


Mr Buxton, however, who had excellent means of 
observation,'^ states that his macaws, which lived free 
in Norfolk, took “ an extravagant interest ” in a pair 
with a nest ; and whenever the female left it, she was 
surrounded by a troop screaming horrible acclama- 
“ tions in her honour.” It is often difficult to judge 
whether animals have any feeling for the sufferings of 
others of their kind. Who can say what cows feel, 
when they surround and stare intently on a dying Or 
dead companion ; apparently, however, as Houzeau 
remarks, they feel no pity. That animals sometimes 
are far from feeling any sympathy is too certain ; for 
they will expel a wounded animal from the herd, or 
gore or worry it to death. This is almost the blackest 
fact in natural history, unless, indeed, the explanation 
which has been suggested is true, that their instinct or 
reason leads them to expel an injured companion, lest 
beasts of prey, including man, should be tempted to 
follow the troop. In this case their conduct is not 
much worse than that of the North American Indians, 
who leave their feeble comrades to perish on the plains ; 
or the Fijians, who, when their parents get old, or fall 
ill, bury them alive.'^ 

Many animals, however, certainly sympathise with 
each other’s distress or danger. This is the case even 
with birds. Captain Stansbury found on a salt lake 
in Utah an old and completely blind pelican, which 


* Annals of Mag. of Nat. 
Hist.,’ November, 1868, p. 382. 

^ Sir J. Lubbock, ‘Prehis- 
toric Times,’ 2nd edit. p. 446. 

As quoted by Mr. L. H. 
Morgan, ‘ The American 
Beaver,* 1868, p. 272. Oapt, 


Stansbury also gives an interest- 
ing account of the manner in 
which a very young pelican, 
carried away by a strong stream, 
was guided and encouraged in 
its attempts to reach the shore 
by half a dozen old birds. 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


157 


was very fat, and must have been well fed for a long 
time by his companions. Mr. Blyth, as he informs 
me, saw Indian crows feeding two or three of their 
companions which were blind ; and I have heard of an 
analogous case with the domestic cock. We may, if 
we choose, call these actions instinctive ; but such 
cases are much too rare for the development of any 
special instinct.^* I have myself seen a dog, who 
never passed a cat who lay sick in a basket, and was a 
great friend of his, without giving her a few licks with 
his tongue, the surest sign of kind feeling in a dog. 

It must be called sympathy that leads a courageous 
dog to fly at any one who strikes his master, as he 
certainly will. I saw a person pretending to beat a 
lady, who had a very timid little dog on her lap, and 
the trial had never been made before; the little 
creature instantly jumped away, but after the pre- 
tended beating was over, it was really pathetic to see 
how perseveringly he tried to lick his mistress’s face, 
B and comfort her. Brehm states that when a baboon 
in confinement was pursued to be punished, the others 
tried to protect him. It must have been sympathy in 
the cases above given which led the baboons and Cer- 
copitheci to defend their young comrades from the 
dogs and the eagle. I will give only one other instance 
of sympathetic and heroic conduct, in the case of a 
little American monkey. Several years ago a keeper 
j at the Zoological Gardens showed me some deep and 
1 scarcely healed wounds on the nape of his own neck, 

1 inflicted on him, whilst kneeling on the floor, by a 

! 

i 

As Mr. Bain states, “ efifec- ‘ Mental and Moral Science, 

I “ tive aid to a sufferer springs 1868, p. 245. 

“ from sympatliy proper : ” “ ‘ Thierleben,’ B. i. s. 85. 


158 


THE DESCENT OP BIAN. 


Past I. 


fierce baboon. The little American monkey, wbo was 
a warm friend of this keeper, lived in the same large 
compartment, and was dreadfully afraid of the great 
baboon. Nevertheless, as soon as he saw his friend in 
peril, he rushed to the rescue, and by screams and 
bites so distracted the baboon that the man was able to 
escape, after, as the surgeon thought, running great 
risk of his life. 

Besides love and sympathy, animals exhibit other 
qualities connected with the social instincts, which 
in us would be called moral ; and I agree with 
Agassiz^® that dogs possess something very like a 
conscience. 

Dogs possess some power of self-command, and this 
does not appear to be wholly the result of fear. As 
Braubach remarks, they will refrain from stealing 
foo*d in the absence of their master. They have long 
been accepted as the very type of fidelity and obedience. 
But the elephant is likewise very faithful to his driver 
or keeper, and probably considers him as the leader of 
the herd. Dr. Hooker informs me that an elephant, 
which he was riding in India, became so deeply bogged 
that he remained stuck fast until the next day, when 
he was extricated by men with ropes. Under such 
circumstances elephants will seize with their trunks 
any object, dead or alive, to place under their knees, to 
prevent their sinking deeper in the mud; and the 
driver was dreadfully afraid lest the animal should have 
seized Dr. Hooker and crushed him to death. But the 
driver himself, as Dr. Hooker was assured, ran no 
risk. This forbearance under an emergency so dread- 

‘ De I’Espece et de la ” ‘ Die Darwin’sche Art- 
Classe,’ 1869, p. 97. Lehre,’ 1869, s. 64. 


Ohap. IV. MORAL SENSE. 169 

ful for a heavy animal, is a wonderful proof of noble 
fidelity.^® 

All animals living in a body, which defend them- 
selves or attack their enemies in concert, must indeed 
be in some degree faithful to one another ; and those 
that follow a leader must be in some degree obedient. 
When the baboons in Abyssinia^® plunder a garden, 
they silently follow their leader ; and if an imprudent 
young animal makes a noise, he receives a slap from 
the others to teach him silence and obedience. Mr. 
Galton, who has had excellent opportunities for 
observing the half- wild cattle in S. Africa, says,^® that 
they cannot endure even a momentary separation from 
the herd. They are essentially slavish, and accept the 
common determination, seeking no better lot than to 
be led by any one ox who has enough self-reliance to 
accept the position. The men who break in these 
animals for harness, watch assiduously for those who, 
by grazing apart, shew a self-reliant disposition, and 
these they train as fore-oxen. Mr. Galton adds that 
such animals are rare and valuable ; and if many were 
born they would soon be eliminated, as lions are always 
on the look-out for the individuals which wander from 
the herd. 

With respect to the impulse which leads certain 
animals to associate together, and to aid one another 
in many ways, we may infer that in most cases they 
are impelled by the same sense of satisfaction or 
pleasure which they experience in performing other 

See also Hooker’s ‘ Hima- See his extremely interest- 

layan Journals,’ vol. ii., 1854, p. ing paper on * Gregariousness in 
333. Cattle, and in Man,’ ‘ MacmU 

Brehm, ‘ Thierleben,’ B. i. Ian’s Mag.’ Feb. 1871, p. 353. 

B. 76. 


160 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Pabt L 


instinctive actions ; or by the same sense of dissatis- 
faction as when other instinctive actions are checked. 
We see this in innumerable instances, and it is illus- 
trated in a striking manner by the acquired instincts 
of our domesticated animals ; thus a young shepherd- 
dog delights in driving and running round a flock of 
sheep, but not in worrying them ; a young fox-hound 
delights in hunting a fox, whilst some other kinds of 
dogs, as I have witnessed, utterly disregard foxes. 
What a strong feeling of inward satisfaction must 
impel a bird, so full of activity, to brood day after day 
over her eggs. Migratory birds are quite miserable if 
stopped from migrating ; perhaps they enjoy starting 
on their long flight; but it is hard to believe that the 
poor pinioned goose, described by Audubon, which 
started on foot at the proper time for its journey of 
probably more than a thousand miles, could have felt 
any joy in doing so. Some instincts are determined 
solely by painful feelings, as by fear, which leads to 
self-preservation, and is in some cases directed towards 
special enemies. No one, I presume, can analyse the 
sensations of pleasure or pain. In many instances, 
however, it is probable that instincts are persistently 
followed from the mere force of inheritance, without 
the stimulus of either pleasure or pain. A young 
pointer, when it first scents game, apparently cannot 
help pointing. A squirrel in a cage who pats the nuts 
which it cannot eat, as if to bury them in the ground, 
can hardly be thought to act thus, either from pleasure 
or pain. Hence the common assumption that men 
must be impelled to every action by experiencing some 
pleasure or pain may be erroneous. Although a habit 
may be blindly and implicitly followed, independently 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


161 


of any pleasure or pain felt at the moment, yet if it be 
forcibly and abruptly checked, a vague sense of dis- 
satisfaction is generally experienced. 

It has often been assumed that animals were in the 
first place rendered social, and that they feel as a con- 
sequence uncomfortable when separated from each 
other, and comfortable whilst together ; but it is a 
more probable view that these sensations were first 
developed, in order that those animals which would 
profit by living in society, should be induced to live 
together, in the same manner as the sense of hunger 
and the pleasure of eating were, no doubt, first acquired 
in order to induce animals to eat. The feeling of 
pleasure from society is probably an extension of the 
parental or filial affections, since the social instinct 
seems to he developed by the young remaining for a 
long time with their parents; and this extension may 
be attributed in part to habit, but chiefly to natural 
selection. With those animals which were benefited 
by living in close association, the individuals which 
took the greatest pleasure in society would best .escape 
various dangers, whilst those that cared least for their 
comrades, and lived solitary, would perish in greater 
numbers. With respect to the origin of the parental 
and filial affections, which apparently lie at the base of 
the social instincts, we know not the steps by which 
they have been gained ; but we may infer that it has 
been to a large extent through natural selection. So 
it has almost certainly been with the unusual and 
opposite feeling of hatred between the nearest relations, 
as with the worker-bees which kill their brother-drones, 
and with the queen-bees which kill their daughter- 
queens; the desire to destroy their nearest relations 


162 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


having been in this case of service to the community. 
Parental affection, or some feeling which replaces it, 
has been developed in certain animals extremely low 
in the scale, for example, in star-fishes and spiders. It 
is also occasionally present in a few members alone in 
a whole group of animals, as in the genus Forficula, or 
earwigs. 

The all-important emotion of sympathy is distinct 
from that of love. A mother may passionately love 
her sleeping and passive infant, but she can hardly at 
such times be said to feel sympathy for it. The love 
of a man for his dog is distinct from sympathy, and so 
is that of a dog for his master. Adam Smith formerly 
argued, as has Mr. Bain recently, that the basis of 
sympathy lies in our strong retentiveness of former 
states of pain or pleasure. Hence, “ the sight of 

“ another person enduring hunger, cold, fatigue, 
“ revives in us some recollection of these states, which 
“ are painful even in idea.” We are thus impelled to 
relieve the sufferings of another, in order that our own 
painful feelings may be at the same time relieved. In 
like manner we are led to participate in the pleasures 
of others.^^ But I cannot see how this view explains 
the fact that sympathy is excited, in an immeasurably 
stronger degree, by a beloved, than by an indifferent 

See the first and striking “ person benefited, or others in 
chapter in Adam Smith’s his stead, may make up, by 
‘ Theory of Moral Sentiments.’ • “ sympathy and good offices re- 
Also Mr. Bain’s ‘Mental and “turned, lor all the sacrifice.” 
Moral Science,’ 1868, p. 244, But if, as appears to be the case, 
and 275-282. Mr. Bain states, sympathy is strictly an instinct, 
that, “ sympathy is, indhectly, its exercise would give direct 
“ a source of pleasure to the pleasure, in the same manner as 
“sympathiser;” and he ac- the exercise, as before remarked, 
counts for this through recipro- of almost every other instinct, 
city. He remarks that “ the 


Chap. IY. 


MORAL SENSE. 


163 


person. The mere sight of suffering, independently of 
love, would suffice to call up in us vivid recollections 
and associations. The explanation may lie in the fact 
that, with all animals, sympathy is directed solely 
towards the members of the same community, and 
therefore towards known, and more or less beloved 
members, but not to all the individuals of the same 
species. This fact is not more surprising than that 
the fears of many animals should be directed against 
special enemies. Species which are not social, such 
as lions and tigers, no doubt feel sympathy for the 
suffering of their own young, but not for that of any 
other animal. With mankind, selfishness, experience, 
and imitation, probably add, as Mr. Bain has shown, to 
the power of sympathy ; for we are led by the hope of 
receiving good in return to perform acts of sympathetic 
kindness to others ; and sympathy is much strength- 
ened by habit. In however complex a manner this 
feeling may have originated, as it is one of high im- 
portance to all those animals which aid and defend 
one another, it will have been increased through 
natural selection ; for those communities, which 
included the greatest number of the most sympathetic 
members, would flourish best, and rear the greatest 
number of offspring. 

It is, however, impossible t6 decide in many cases 
whether certain social instincts have been acquired 
through natural selection, or are the indirect result of 
other instincts and faculties, such as sympathy, reason, 
experience, and a tendency to imitation; or again, 
whether they are simply the result of long-continued 
habit. So remarkable an instinct as the placing 
gentinels to warn the community of danger, can hardly 


164 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


have been the indirect result of any of these faculties ; 
it must, therefore, have been directly acquired. On 
the other hand, the habit followed by the males of some 
social animals of defending the community, and of 
attacking their enemies or their prey in concert, may 
perhaps have originated from mutual sympathy; but 
courage, and in most cases strength, must have been 
previously acquired, probably through natural selec- 
tion. 

Of the various instincts and habits, some are much 
stronger than others ; that is, some either give more 
pleasure in their performance, and more distress in 
their prevention, than others ; or, which is probably 
quite as important, they are, through inheritance, 
more persistently followed, without exciting any special 
feeling of pleasure or pain. We are ourselves conscious 
that some habits are much more difficult to cure or 
change than others. Hence a struggle may often be 
observed in animals between different instincts, or 
between an instinct and some habitual disposition ; as 
when a dog rushes after a hare, is rebuked, pauses, 
hesitates, pursues again, or returns ashamed to his 
master ; or as between the love of a female dog for her 
young puppies and for her master, — for she may be 
seen to slink away to them, as if half ashamed of not 
accompanying her master. But the most curious 
instance known to me of one instinct getting the better 
of another, is the migratory instinct conquering the 
maternal instinct. The former is wonderfully strong ; 
a confined bird will at the proper season beat her breast 
against the wires of her cage, until it is bare and 
bloody. It causes young salmon to leap out of the 
fresh water, in which they could continue to exist, and 


Ohap. IV. 


MOBAL SENSE. 


165 


thus unintentionally to commit suicide. Every one 
knows how strong the maternal instinct is, leading 
even timid birds to face great danger, though with 
hesitation, and in opposition to the instinct of self- 
preservation. Nevertheless, the migratory instinct is 
so powerful, that late in the autumn swallows, house- 
martins, and swifts frequently desert their tender 
young, leaving them to perish miserably in their 
nests. 

We can perceive that an instinctive impulse, if it be 
in any way more beneficial to a species than some other 
or opposed instinct, would be rendered the more potent 
of the two through natural selection ; for the indivi- 
duals which had it most strongly developed would 
survive in larger numbers. Whether this is the case 
with the migratory in comparison with the maternal 
instinct, may be doubted. The great persistence, or 
steady action of the former at certain seasons of the 
year during the whole day, may give it for a time 
paramount force. 

Man a social animaL — Every one will admit that 


^ This fact, the Rev. L. 
Jenyns states (see his edition of 
‘ White’s Nat. Hist, of Selborne,’ 
1853, p. 204) was first recorded 
by the illustrious Jenner, in 
‘ Phil. Ti ansact.’ 1824, and has 
since been confirmed by several 
observers, especially by Mr. 
Blackwall. This latter careful 
observer examined, late in the 
autumn, during two years, 
thirty -six nests ; he found that 
twelve contained young dead 
birds, five contained eggs on the 
point of being hatched, and 
three, eggs not nearly hatched. 


Many birds, not yet old enough 
for a prolonged flight, are like- 
wise deserted and left behind. 
See Blackwall, ‘Researches in 
Zoology,’ 1834, pp. 108, 118. 
For some additional evidence, 
although this is not wanted, see 
Leroy, * Lettres Phil.’ 1802, p. 
217. For Swifts, Gould’s ‘ In- 
troduction to the Birds of Great 
Britain,’ 1823, p. 5. Similar 
cases have been observed in 
Canada by Mr. Adams ; ‘ Pop. 
Science Review,’ July, 1873, p. 
283. 


166 


The descent oe man. 


Tart 1. 


man is a social being. We see this in his dislike of 
solitude, and in his wish for society beyond that of his 
own family. Solitary confinement is one of the severest 
punishments which can be inflicted. Some authors 
suppose that man primevally lived in single families ; 
but at the present day, though single families, or only 
two or three together, roam the solitudes of some savage 
lands, they always, as far as I can discover, hold 
friendly relations with other families inhabiting the 
same district. Such families occasionally meet in 
council, and unite for their common defence. It is no 
argument against savage man being a social animal, 
that the tribes inhabiting adjacent districts are almost 
always at war with each other ; for the social instincts 
never extend to all the individuals of the same species. 
Judging from the analogy of the majority of the Quad- 
rumana, it is probable that the early ape-like progeni- 
tors of man were likewise social; but this is not of 
much importance for us. Although man, as he now 
exists, has few special instincts, having lost any which 
his early progenitors may have possessed, this is no 
reason why he should not have retained from an 
extremely remote period some degree of instinctive 
love and sympathy for his fellows. We are indeed 
all conscious that we do possess such sympathetic 
feelings but our consciousness does not tell us 
whether they are instinctive, having originated long 
ago in the same manner as with the lower animals, or 

^ ‘Himie remarks (‘ An En- “ ent to us, but that the view of 
quiry Concerning the Principles “ the former . . . communicates 
of Morals,’ edit, of 1751, p. 132), “ a secret joy ; the appearance 

“There seems a necessity for “of the latter . . . throws a 
“confessing that the happiness “melancholy damp over the 
“and misery of others are not “imagination.” 

“spectacles altogether indiffer- 


Chap. IV. 


xUORAL SENSE. 


167 


whether they have been acquired by each of us during 
our early years. As man is a social animal, it is almost 
certain that he would inherit a tendency to be faithful 
to his comrades, and obedient to the leader of his tribe ; 
for these qualities are common to most social animals. 
He would consequently possess some capacity for self- 
command. He would from an inherited tendency be 
willing to defend, in concert with others, his fellow- 
men ; and would be ready to aid them in any way, 
which did not too greatly interfere with his own 
welfare dr his own strong desires. 

The social animals which stand at the bottom of the 
scale are guided almost exclusively, and those which 
stand higher in the scale are largely guided, by special 
instincts in the aid which they give to the members 
of the same community ; but they are likewise in part 
impelled by mutual love and sympathy, assisted ap- 
parently by some amount of reason. Although man, 
as just remarked, has no special instincts to tell him 
how to aid his fellow-men, he still has the impulse, and 
with his improved intellectual faculties would naturally 
be much guided in this respect by reason and ex- 
perience. Instinctive sympathy would also cause him 
to value highly the approbation of his fellows ; for, as 
Mr. Bain has clearly shewn,^^ the love of praise and the 
strong feeling of glory, and the still stronger horror of 
scorn and infamy, ‘‘ are due to the workings of sym- 
pathy.” Consequently man would be influenced in the 
highest degree by the wishes, approbation, and blame 
of his fellow-men, as expressed by their gestures’ and 
language. Thus the social instincts, which must have 
been acquired by man in a very rude state, and probably 
^ ‘ Mental and Moral Science,’ 1868, p. 254. 


168 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Fabt I. 


even by bis early ape-like progenitors, still give the 
impulse to some of his best actions ; but his actions are 
in a higher degree determined hy the expressed wishes 
and judgment of his fellow-men, and unfortunately very 
often by his own strong selfish desires. But as love, 
sympathy and self-command become strengthened by 
habit, and as the power of reasoning becomes clearer, 
so that man can value justly the judgments of his 
fellows, he will feel himself impelled, apart from any 
transitory pleasure or pain,- to certain lines of conduct. 
He might then declare — not that any barbarian or 
uncultivated man could thus think — I am the supreme 
judge of my own conduct, and in the words of Kant, I 
will not in my own person violate the dignity of 
humanity. 

The more enduring 'Social Instincts conquer the less 
'persistent Instincts . — We have not, however, as yet 
considered the main point, on which, from our present 
point of view, the whole question of the moral sense 
turns. Why should a man feel that he ought to obey 
one instinctive desire rather than another ? Why is 
he bitterly regretful, if he has yielded to a strong sense 
of self-preservation, and has not risked his life to save 
that of a fellow-creature ? or why does he regret 
having stolen food from hunger ? 

It is evident in the first place, that with mankind 
the instinctive impulses have different degrees of 
strength ; a savage will risk his own life to save that 
of a member of the same community, hut will be 
wholly indifferent about a stranger : a young and 
timid mother urged by the maternal instinct will, 
without a moment’s hesitation, run the greatest danger 
for her own infant, but not for a mere fellow-creature. 


Chap IV. 


'MORAL SENSE. 


169 


Nevertheless many a civilized man, or even boy, who 
never before risked his life for another, but full of 
courage and sympathy, has disregarded the instinct of 
self-preservation, and plunged at once into a torrent to 
save a drowning man, though a stranger. In this case 
man is impelled by the same instinctive motive, which 
made the heroic little American monkey, formerly 
described, save his keeper, by attacking the great and 
dreaded baboon. Such actions as the above appear to 
be the simple result of the greater strength of the 
social or maternal instincts than that of any other 
instinct or motive ; for they are performed too instan- 
taneously for reflection, or for pleasure or pain to be 
felt at the time ; though, if prevented by any cause, 
distress or even misery might be felt. In a timid 
man, on the other hand, the instinct of self-preservation 
might be so strong, that he would be unable to force 
himself to run any such risk, perhaps not even for his 
own child. 

I am aware that some persons maintain that actions 
performed impulsively, as in the above cases, do not 
come under the dominion of the moral sense, and 
cannot be called moral. They confine this term to 
actions done deliberately, after a victory over opposing 
desires, or when prompted by some exalted motive. 
But it appears scarcely possible to draw any clear line 
of distinction of this kind.^^ As far as exalted motives 
are concerned, many instances have been recorded of 

^ 1 refer here to the distiuction do. Mr. Leslie Stephen remarks 
between what has been called (‘ Essays on Freethinking and 
material and formal morality. Plain Speaking,’ 1873, p. 83), 
I am glad to find that Professor the metaphysical distinction, 
Huxley (‘Critiques and Ad- “between material and formal 
dresses,’ 1873, p. 287) takes the “morality is as irrelevant as other 
same view on this subject as 1 “such distinctions.” 


170 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


savages, destitute of any feeling of general benevolence 
towards mankind, and not guided by any religious 
motive, who have deliberately sacrificed their lives as 
prisoners,^® rather than betray their comrades ; and 
surely their conduct ought to be considered as moral. 
As far as deliberation, and the victory over opposing 
motives are concerned, animals may be seen doubting 
between opposed instincts, in rescuing their offspring 
or comrades from danger ; yet their actions, though 
done for the good of others, are not called moral. 
Moreover, anything performed very often by us, will at 
last be done without deliberation or hesitation, and can 
then hardly be distinguished from an instinct ; yet 
surely no one will pretend that such an action ceases to 
be moral. On the contrary, we all feel that an act 
cannot be considered as perfect, or as performed in the 
most noble manner, unless it be done impulsively, 
without deliberation or effort, in the same manner as by 
a man in whom the requisite qualities are innate. He 
who is forced to overcome his fear or want of sympathy 
before he acts, deserves, however, in one way higher 
credit than the man whose innate disposition leads 
him to a good act without effort. As we cannot dis- 
tinguish between motives, we rank. all actions of a 
certain class as moral, if performed by a moral being. 
A moral being is one who is capable of comparing his 
past and future actions or motives, and of approving or 
disapproving of them. We have no reason to suppose 
that any of the lower animals have this capacity ; 
therefore, when a Newfoundland dog drags a child out 

I have given one such case, traying the plans of their com- 
namely of three Patagonian panions in war (‘Journal of 
Indians who preferred being Researches,’ 1845, p. 103). 
shot, one after the other, to be- 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


171 


of the water, or a monkey faces danger to rescue its 
comrade, or takes charge of an orphan monkey, we do 
not call its conduct moral. But in the case of man, 
who alone can with certainty be ranked as a moral 
being, actions of a certain class are called moral, 
whether performed deliberately, after a struggle with 
opposing motives, or impulsively through instinct, or 
from the effects of slowly-gained habit. 

But to return to our more immediate subject. 
Although some instincts are more powerful than others, 
and thus lead to corresponding actions, yet it is 
untenable, that in man the social instincts (including 
the love of praise and fear of blame) possess greater 
strength, or have, through long habit, acquired greater 
strength than the instincts of self-preservation, hunger, 
lust, vengeance, &c. Why then does man regret, even 
though trying to banish such regret, that he has followed 
the one natural impulse rather than the other ; and why 
does he further feel that he ought to regret his con- 
duct ? Man in this respect differs profoundly from the 
lower animals. Nevertheless we can, I think, see with 
some degree of clearness the reason of this difference. 

Man, from the activity of his mental faculties, cannot 
avoid reflection : past impressions and images are 
incessantly and clearly passing through his mind. 
Now with those animals which live permanently in a 
body, the social instincts are ever present and persistent. 
Such animals are always ready to utter the danger- 
signal, to defend the community, and to give aid to 
their fellows in accordance with their habits ; they feel 
at all times, without the stimulus of any special passion 
or desire, some degree of love and sympathy for them ; 
they are unhappy if long separated from them, and 


172 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part 1. 


always happy to be again in their company. So it is 
with ourselves. Even when we are quite alone, how 
often do we think with pleasure or pain of what others 
think of us, — of their imagined approbation or dis- 
approbation ; and this all follows from sympathy, a 
fundamental element of the social iifstincts. A man 
who possessed no trace of such instincts would be an 
unnatural monster. On the other hand, the desire to 
satisfy hunger, or any passion such as vengeance, is in 
its nature temporary, and can for a time be fully 
satisfied. Nor is it easy, perhaps hardly possible, to 
call up with complete vividness the feeling, for instance, 
of hunger ; nor indeed, as has often been remarked, of 
any suffering. The instinct of self-preservation is not 
felt except in the presence of danger ; and many a 
coward has thought himself brave until he has met his 
enemy face to face. The wish for another man’s 
property is perhaps as persistent a desire as any that 
can be named ; but even in this case the satisfaction of 
actual possession is generally a weaker feeling than 
the desire : many a thief, if not a habitual one, after 
success has wondered why he stole some article.^’ 


Enmity or hatred seems 
also to be a highly persistent 
feeling, perhaps more so than 
any other that can be named. 
Envy is defined as hatred of 
another for some excellence or 
success ; and Bacon insists 
(Essay ix.), “Of all other 
“ affections envy is the most 
“ importune and continual.” 
Dogs are very apt to hate both 
strange men and strange dogs, 
especially if they live near at 
hand, but do not belong to the 
same family, tribe, or clan ; this 


feeling would thus seem to be 
innate, and is certainly a most 
persistent one. It seems to be 
the complement and converse of 
the true social instinct. From 
what we hear of savages, it 
would appear that something of 
the same kind holds good with 
them. It this be so, it would 
be a small step in any one to 
transfer such feeling.s to any 
member of the same tribe if he 
had done him an injury and had 
become his enemy. Nor is it 
probable that the primitive 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


173 


A man cannot prevent past impressions often re- 
passing through his mind ; he will thus he driven to make 
a comparison between the impressions of past hunger, 
vengeance satisfied, or danger shunned at other men’s 
cost, with the almost ever-present instinct of sympathy, 
and with his early knowledge of what others consider 
as praiseworthy or blameable. This knowledge cannot 
be banished from his mind, and from instinctive sym- 
pathy is esteemed of great moment. He will then feel 
as if he had been baulked in following a present instinct 
or habit, and this with all animals causes dissatisfaction, 
or even misery. 

The above case of the swallow affords an illustration, 
though of a reversed nature, of a temporary though 
for the time strongly persistent instinct conquering 
another instinct, which is usually dominant over all 
others. At the proper season these birds seem all day 
long to be impressed with the desire to migrate ; their 
habits change; they become restless, are noisy and 
congregate in flocks. Whilst the mother-bird is 
feeding, or brooding over her nestlings, the maternal 
instinct is probably stronger than the migratory ; but 
the instinct which is the more persistent gains the 
victory, and at last, at a moment when her young ones 
are not in sight, she takes flight and deserts them. 
When arrived at the end of her long journey, and the 


conscience would reproach a 
man for injuring his enemy : 
rather it would reproach him, if 
he had not revenged himself. 
To do good in return for evil, 
to love your enemy, is a height 
of morality - to which it may 
be doubted whether the social 
instincts would, by themselves, 


have ever led us. It is necessary 
that these instincts, together 
with sympathy, should have 
been highly cultivated and ex- 
tended by the aid of reason, in- 
struction, and the love or fear 
of God, before any such golden 
rule would ever be thought of 
and obeyed. 


174 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


migratory instinct has ceased to act, what an agony of 
remorse the bird would feel, if, from being endowed 
with great mental activity, she could not prevent the 
image constantly passing through her mind, of her 
young ones perishing in the bleak north from cold and 
hunger. 

At the moment of action, man will no doubt he apt to 
follow the stronger impulse; and though this may 
occasionally prompt him to the noblest deeds, it will 
more commonly lead him to gratify his own desires at 
the expense of other men. But after their gratification 
when past and weaker impressions are judged by the 
ever-enduring social instinct, and by his deep regard 
for the good opinion of his fellows, retribution will 
surely come. He will then feel remorse, repentance, 
regret, or shame ; this latter feeling, however, relates 
almost exclusively to the judgment of others. He will 
consequently resolve more or less firmly to act differently 
for the future ; and this is conscience ; for conscience 
looks backwards, and serves as a guide for the 
future. 

The nature and strength of the feelings which we 
call regret, shame, repentance or remorse, depend 
apparently not only on the strength of the violated 
instinct, hut partly on the strength of the temptation, 
and often still more on the judgment of our fellows. 
How far each man values the appreciation of others, 
depends on the strength of his innate or acquired 
feeling of sympathy ; and on his own capacity for 
reasoning out the remote consequences of his acts. 
Another element is most important, although not 
necessary, the reverence or fear of the Gods, or Spirits 
believed in by each man : and this applies especially in 


Chap. IY. 


MORAL SENSE. 


175 


cases of remorse. Several critics have objected that 
though some slight regret or repentance may he 
explained by the view advocated in this chapter, it is 
impossible thus to account for the soul- shaking feeling 
of remorse. But I can see little force in this objection. 
My critics do not define what they mean by remorse, 
and I can find no definition implying more than an 
overwhelming sense of repentance. Eemorse seems to 
bear the same relation to repentance, as rage does to 
anger, or agony to pain. It is far from strange that 
an instinct so strong and so generally admired, as 
maternal love, should, if disobeyed, lead to the deepest 
misery, as soon as the impression of the past cause of 
disobedience is weakened. Even when an action is 
opposed to no special instinct, merely to know that our 
friends and equals despise us for it is enough to cause 
great misery. Who can doubt that the refusal to fight 
a duel through fear has caused many men an agony of 
shame ? Many a Hindoo, it is said, has been stirred 
to the bottom of his soul by having partaken of unclean 
food. Here is another case of what must, I think, he 
called remorse. Dr. Landor acted as a magistrate in 
West Australia, and relates,^® that a native on his farm, 
after losing one of his wives from disease, came and 
said that “ he was going to a distant tribe to spear a 
“ woman, to satisfy his sense of duty to his wife. I 
‘‘told him that if he did so, I would send him to 
“ prison for life. He remained about the farm for some 
“ months, hut got exceedingly thin, and complained 
“ that he could not rest or eat, that his wife’s spirit 
‘ was haunting him, because he had not taken a life 

“ ‘ Insanity in Relation to Law ; ’ Ontario, United States, 1871, 
p. 1, 


176 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part I. 


‘‘for hers. I was inexorable, and assured him that 
“ nothing should save him if he did.” Nevertheless the 
man disappeared for more than a year, and then re- 
turned in high condition ; and his other wife told Dr. 
Landor that her husband had taken the life of a woman 
belonging to a distant tribe ; but it was impossible to 
obtain legal evidence of the act. The breach of a rule 
held sacred by the tribe, will thus, as it seems, give 
rise to the deepest feelings, — and this quite apart from 
the social instincts, excepting in so far as the rule is 
grounded on the judgment of the community. How so 
many strange superstitions have arisen throughout the 
world we know not ; nor can we tell how some real and 
great crimes, such as incest, have come to be held in 
an abhorrence (which is not however quite universal) 
by the lowest savages. It is even doubtful whether in 
some tribes incest would be looked on with greater 
horror, than would the marriage of a man with a 
woman bearing the same name, though not a relation. 
“ To violate this law is a crime which the Australians 
“hold in the greatest abhorrence, in this agreeing 
“ exactly with certain tribes of North America. When 
“ the question is put in either district, is it worse to 
“ kill a girl of a foreign tribe, or to marry a girl of one’s 
“ own, an answer just opposite to purs would be given 
“ without hesitation.” We may, therefore, reject the 
belief, lately insisted on by some writers, that the 
abhorrence of incest is due to our possessing a special 
God-implanted conscience. On the whole it is intel- 
ligible, that a man urged by so powerful a sentiment 
as remorse, though arising as above explained, should 
be led to act in a manner, which he has been taught to 
p, B. Tylor in ‘ Contemporary Review,’ April, 1873, p. 707, 


(JllAP. IV. 


MOKAI. SENSE, 


177 


believe serves as an expiation, snch as delivering himself 
up to justice. 

Man prompted by his conscience, will through long 
habit acquire such perfect self-command, that his 
desires and passions will at last yield instantly and 
without a struggle to his social sympathies and in- 
stincts, including his feeling for the judgment of his 
fellows. The still hungry, or the still revengeful man 
will not think of stealing food, or of wreaking his 
vengeance. It is possible, or as we shall hereafter see, 
even probable, that the habit of self-command may, 
like other habits, be inherited. Thus at last man 
comes to feel, through acquired and perhaps inherited 
habit, that it is best for him to obey his more persistent 
impulses. The imperious word ought seems merely to 
imply the consciousness of the existence of a rule of 
conduct, however it may have originated. Formerly it 
must have been often vehemently urged that an insulted 
gentleman ought to fight a duel. We even say that a 
pointer ought to point, and a retriever to retrieve game. 
If they fail to do so, they fail in their duty and act 
wrongly. 

If any desire or instinct leading to an action 
opposed to the good of others still appears, when 
recalled to mind, as strong as, or stronger than, the 
social instinct, a man will feel no keen regret at having 
followed it ; but he will be conscious that if his con- 
duct were known to his fellows, it would meet with 
their disapprobation ; and few are so destitute of 
sympathy as not to feel discomfort when this is realised. 
If he has no such sympathy, and if his desires leading 
to bad actions are at the time strong, and when 
recalled are not over-mastered by the persistent social 

N 


178 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Pakt 1. 

instincts, and the judgment of others, then he is 
essentially a bad man ; and the sole restraining 
motive left is the fear of punishment, and the convic- 
tion that in the long run it would be best for his own 
selfish interests to regard the good of others rather 
than his own. 

It is obvious that every one may with an easy con- 
science gratify his own desires, if they do not interfere 
with his social instincts, that is with the good of 
others ; but in order to be quite free from self-reproach, 
or at least of anxiety, it is almost necessary for him to 
avoid the disapprobation, whether reasonable or not, 
of his fellow-men. Nor must he break through the 
fixed habits of his life, especially if these are supported 
by reason ; for if he does, he will assuredly feel dis- 
satisfaction. He must likewise avoid the reprobation 
of the one God or gods in whom, according to his 
knowledge or superstition, he may believe ; but in this 
case the additional fear of divine punishment often 
supervenes. 

The strictly Social Virtues at first alone regarded . — 
The above view of the origin and nature of the moral 
sense, which tells us what we ought to do, and of the 
conscience which reproves us if we disobey it, accords 
well with what we see of the early and undeveloped 
condition of this faculty in mankind. The virtues 
which must be practised, at least generally, by rude men, 
so that they may associate in a body, are those which are 

Dr. Prosper Despine in his worst criminals, who apparently 
‘Psychologic Naturelle,’ 1868 have been entirely destitute of 
(tom. i. p. 243 ; tom. ii. p. 169) conscience, 
gives many curious cases of the 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


179 


still recognised as the most important. But they are 
practised almost exclusively in relation to the men of 
the same tribe ; and their opposites are not regarded 
as crimes in relation to the men of other tribes. No 
tribe could hold together if murder, robbery, treachery, 
&o., were common; consequently such crimes within 
the limits of the same tribe “ are branded with ever- 
“ lasting infamy ; ” but excite no such sentiment 
beyond these limits. A North-American Indian is 
well pleased with himself, and is honoured by others, 
when he scalps a man of another tribe; and a Dyak 
cuts off the head of an unoffending person, and dries 
it as a trophy. The murder of infants has prevailed 
on the largest scale throughout the world,^^ and has 
met with no reproach; but infanticide, especially of 
females, has been thought to be good for the tribe, or 
at least not injurious. Suicide during former times 
was not generally considered as a crime,^^ but rather, 
from the courage displayed, as an honourable act ; and 
it is still practised by some semi-civilised and savage 
nations without reproach, for it does not obviously 


See an able article in the 
* North British Review,’ 1867, p. 
395. See also Mr. W. Bagehot’s 
articles on the Importance of Obe- 
dience and Coherence to Primi- 
tive Man, in the ‘Fortnightly 
Review,’ 1867, p. 529, and 1868, 
p. 457, &c. 

“ The fullest account which 
I have met with is "by Dr. Ger- 
land, in his ‘Ueber dan Auss- 
terben der Naturvolker,’ 1868 ; 
but I shall have to recur to the 
subject of infanticide in a future 
chapter. 

See the very interesting 


discussion on Suicide in Lecky’s 
‘ History of European Morals,’ 
vol. i, 1869, p. 223. With 
respect to savages, Mr. Winwood 
Reade informs me that the 
negroes of West Africa often 
commit suicide. It is well 
known how common it was 
amongst the miserable aborigines 
of South America after the 
Spanish conquest. For New 
Zealand, see the voyage of the 
“ Novara,” and for the Aleutian 
Islands, Miiller, as quoted by 
Houzeau, ‘ Les Facultes Men- 
tales,’ &c., tom. ii. p. 136. 


180 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I 


concern others of the tribe. It has been recorded that 
an Indian Thug conscientiously regretted that he had 
not robbed and strangled as many travellers as did 
his father before him. In a rude state of civilisation 
the robbery of strangers is, indeed, generally considered 
as honourable. 

Slavery, although in some ways beneficial during 
ancient times,^^ is a great crime; yet it was not so 
regarded until quite recently, even by the most 
civilised nations. And this was especially the case, 
because the slaves belonged in general to a race 
different from that of their masters. As barbarians 
do not regard the opinion of their women, wives 
are commonly treated like slaves. Most savages are 
utterly indifferent to the sufferings of strangers, or 
even delight in witnessing them. It is well known 
that the women and children of the North-American 
Indians aided in torturing their enemies. Some 
savages take a horrid pleasure in cruelty to animals,^^ 
and humanity is an unknown virtue. Nevertheless, 
besides the family affections, kindness is common, 
especially during sickness, between the members of the 
same tribe, and is sometimes extended beyond these 
limits. Mungo Park’s touching account of the kindness 
of the negro women of the interior to him is well known. 
Many instances could be given of the noble fidelity of 
savages towards each other, but not to strangers ; 
common experience justifies the maxim of the 
Spaniard, “ Never, never trust an Indian.” There 
cannot be fidelity without truth ; and this fundamental 

See Mr. Bagehot, ‘ Physics Hamilton’s account of the 
and Politics,’ 1872, p. 72. Kaffirs, ‘ Anthropological Ke- 

^ See, for instance, Mr. view,’ 1870, p. xv. 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


181 


virtue is not rare between the members of tbe same 
tribe : thus Mungo Park beard the negro women 
teaching their young children to love the truth. This, 
again, is one of the virtues which becomes so deeply 
rooted in the mind, that it is sometimes practised by 
savages, even at a high cost, towards strangers ; but to 
lie to your enemy has rarely been thought a sin, as 
the history of modern diplomacy too plainly shews. 
As soon as a tribe has a recognised leader, disobedience 
becomes a crime, and even abject submission is looked 
at as a sacred virtue. 

As during rude times no man can be useful or faith- 
ful to his tribe without courage, this quality has 
universally been placed in the highest rank ; and 
although in civilised countries a good yet timid man 
may be far more useful to the community than a brave 
one, we cannot help instinctively honouring the latter 
above a coward, however benevolent. Prudence, on the 
other hand, which does not concern the welfare of others, 
though a very useful virtue, has never been highly 
esteemed. As no man can practise the virtues necessary 
for the welfare of his tribe without self-sacrifice, self- 
command, and the power of endurance, these qualities 
have been at all times highly and most justly valued. 
The American savage voluntarily submits to the most 
horrid tortures without a groan, to prove and strengthen 
his fortitude and courage ; and we cannot help admir- 
ing him, or even an Indian Fakir, who, from a foolish 
religious motive, swings suspended by a hook buried in 
his flesh. 

The other so-called self-regarding virtues, which do 
not obviously, though they may really, aflfect the wel- 
fare of the tribe, have never been esteemed by savages, 


182 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


though now highly appreciated by civilised nations. 
The greatest intemperance is no reproach with savages. 
Utter licentiousness, and unnatural crimes, prevail 
to an astounding extent.^® As soon, however, as 
marriage, whether polygamous, or monogamous, 
becomes common, jealousy will lead .to the incul- 
cation of female virtue ; and this, being honoured, will 
tend to spread to the unmarried females. How slowly 
it spreads to the male sex, we see at the present day. 
Chastity eminently requires self-command ; therefore it 
has been honoured from a very early period in the 
moral history of civilised man. As a consequence of 
this, the senseless practice of celibacy has been ranked 
from a remote period as a virtue.^^ The hatred of 
indecency, which appears to us so natural as to be 
thought innate, and which is so valuable an aid to 
chastity, is a modern virtue, appertaining exclusively, 
as Sir G. Staunton remarks,^® to civilised life. This is 
shewn by the ancient religious rites of various nations, 
by the drawings on the walls of Pompeii, and by the 
practices of many savages. 

We have now seen that actions are regarded by 
savages, and were probably so regarded by primeval 
man, as good or bad, solely as they obviously affect the 
welfare of the tribe, — not that of the species, nor that 
of an individual member of the tribe. This conclusion 
agrees well with the belief that the so-called moral 
sense is aboriginally derived from the social instincts, 
for both relate at first exclusively to the community. 

Mr. M’Lennan has given pean Morals,’ vol. i. 1869, p. 
(‘ Primitive Marriage,’ 1865, p. 109. 

176) a good collection of facts on ‘ Embassy to China,’ vol. ii. 

this head. p. 348. 

Lecky, * History of Euro- 


Chap. IY. 


MORAL SENSE. 


183 


The chief causes of the low morality of savages, as 
judged by our standard, are, firstly, the confinement 
of sympathy to the same tribe. Secondly, powers of 
reasoning insufficient to recognise the bearing of many 
virtues, especially of the self-regarding virtues, on the 
general welfare of the tribe. Savages, for instance, 
fail to trace the multiplied evils consequent on a want 
of temperance, chastity, &c. And, thirdly, weak 
power of self-command; for this power has not been 
strengthened through long-continued, perhaps in- 
herited, habit, instruction and religion. 

I have entered into the above details on the im- 
morality of savages, because some authors have 
recently taken a high view of their moral nature, or 
have attributed most of their crimes to mistaken 
benevolence.*® These authors appears to rest their 
conclusion on savages possessing those virtues which 
are serviceable, or even necessary, for the existence of 
the family and of the tribe, — qualities which they un- 
doubtedly do possess, and often in a high degree. 

Concluding Bemarks . — It was assumed formerly by 
philosophers of the derivative school of morals that 
the foundation of morality lay in a form of Selfishness ; 
but more recently the “ Greatest happiness principle 
has been brought prominently forward. It is, how- 
ever, more correct to speak of the latter principle as 
the standard, and not as the motive of conduct. 

See on this subject copious This term is used in an able 

evidence in Chap. vii. of Sir J. article in the ‘ Westminster 
Lubbock, ‘Origin of Civilisa- Review,’ Oct. 1869, p. 498. 
tion,’ 1870. For the “ Greatest happiness 

^ For instance Lecky, ‘ Hist. “ principle,” see J. S. Mill, 
Euroi)can florals,’ vol. i. p. 124. ‘ Utilitarianism,’ p. 17. 


184 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Patit I. 


Nevertheless, all the authors whose works T have con- 
sulted, with a few exceptions,^^ write as if there must 
be a distinct motive for every action, and that this 
must be associated with some pleasure or displeasure. 
But man seems often to act impulsively, that is from 
instinct or long habit, without any consciousness of 
pleasure, in the same manner as does probably a bee or 
ant, when it blindly follows its instincts. Under cir- 
cumstances of extreme peril, as during a fire, when a 
man endeavours to save a fellow-creature without a 
moment’s hesitation, he can hardly feel pleasure ; and 
still less has he time to reflect on the dissatisfaction 
which he might subsequently experience if he did not 
make the attempt. Should he afterwards reflect over his 
own conduct, he would feel that there lies within him 
an impulsive power widely different from a search after 
pleasure or happiness ; and this seems to be the deeply 
planted social instinct. 

In the case of the lower animals it seems much 


Mill recognises (‘ System of 
liOgic,’ vol. ii. p. 422) in the 
clearest manner, that actions 
may be performed through 
habit without the anticipation 
of pleasure. Mr. H. Sidgwick 
also, in his Essay on Pleasure 
and Desire (‘ The Contemporary 
Peview,’ April' 1872, p. 671), 
l emarks : “ To sum up, in con- 
“ travention of the doctrine that 
“ our conscious active impulses 
“ are always directed towards 
“the production of agreeable 
“ sensations in ourselves, 1 
“would maintain that we find 
“ everywhere in consciousness 
“ extra-regarding impulse, di- 
“ rect 'd towards something that 
“ is not pleasure; that in m iny 


“ cases the impulse is so far in- 
“ compatible with the self-re- 
“garding that the two do not 
“easily co-exist in the same 
“ moment of consciousness.” A 
dim feeling that our impulses 
do not by any means always 
arise from any contemporaneous 
or anticipated pleasure, has, ] 
cannot but think, been one chief 
cause of the acceptance of the 
intuitive theory of morality, and 
of the rejection of the utilitarian 
or “ Greatest happiness ” theory. 
With respect to the latter theory 
the standard and the motive 
of conduct have no doubt often 
been confused, but they are 
really in some degree blended. 


Chap. IV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


185 


more appropriate to speak of their social instincts, 
as liaving been developed for the general good rather 
than for the general happiness of the species. The 
term, general good, may he defined as the rearing of 
the greatest number of individuals in full vigour and 
health, with all their faculties perfect, under the con- 
dition^ to which they are subjected. As the social 
instincts both of man and the lower animals have no 
doubt been developed by nearly the same steps, it 
would be advisable, if found practicable, to use the 
same definition in both cases, and to take as the 
standard of morality, the general good or welfare of the 
community, rather than the general happiness ; but 
this definition would perhaps require some limitation 
on account of political ethics. 

When a man risks his life to save that of a fellow- 
creature, it seems also more correct to say that he acts 
for the general good, rather than for the general 
liappiness of mankind. No doubt the welfare and the 
happiness of the individual usually coincide ; and a 
contented, happy tribe will flourish better than one 
that is discontented and unhappy. We have seen that 
even at an early period in the history of man, the 
expressed wishes of the community will have naturally 
influenced to a large' extent the conduct of each 
member ; and as all wish for happiness, the greatest 
“ happiness principle ” will have become a most im- 
portant secondary guide and object; the social instinct, 
however, together with sympathy (which leads to our 
regarding the approbation and disapprobation of 
others), having served as the primary impulse and 
guide. Thus the reproach is removed of laying the 
foundation of the noblest part of our nature in the 


186 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


base principle of selfishness ; unless, indeed, the 
satisfaction which every animal feels, when it follows 
its proper instincts, and the dissatisfaction felt when 
prevented, be called selfish. 

The wishes and opinions of the members of the same 
community, expressed at first orally, but later by 
writing also, either form the sole guides of our conduct, 
or greatly reinforce the social instincts ; such opinions, 
however, have sometimes a tendency directly opposed 
to these instincts. This latter fact is well exemplified 
by the Law of Honour, that is, the law of the opinion 
of our equals, and not of all our countrymen. The 
breach of this law, even when the breach is known to 
be strictly accordant with true morality, has caused 
many a man more agony than a real crime. We 
recognise the same influence in the burning sense of 
shame which most of us have felt, even after the 
interval of years, when calling to mind some accidental 
breach of a trifling, though fixed, rule of etiquette. 
The judgment of the community will generally be 
guided by some rude experience of what is best in the 
long run for all the members ; but this judgment will 
not rarely err from ignorance and weak powers of 
reasoning. Hence the strangest customs and super- 
stitions, in complete opposition to the true welfare 
and happiness of mankind, have become all-powerful 
throughout the world. We see this in the horror felt 
by a Hindoo who breaks his caste, and in many other 
such cases. It would be difficult to distinguish 
between the remorse felt by a Hindoo who has yielded 
to the temptation of eating unclean food, from that 
felt after committing a theft; but the former would 
probably be. the more severe. 


Chap. FV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


187 


How so many absurd rules of conduct, as well as so 
many absurd religious beliefs, have originated, we do 
not know ; nor bow it is that they have become, in all 
quarters of the world, so deeply impressed on the mind 
of men ; but it is worthy of remark that a belief 
constantly inculcated during the early years of life, 
whilst the brain is impressible, appears to acquire 
almost the nature of an instinct ; and the very essence 
of an instinct is that it is followed independently of 
reason. Neither can we say why certain admirable 
virtues, such as the love of truth, are much more 
highly appreciated by some savage tribes than by 
others nor, again, why similar differences prevail 
even amongst highly civilised nations. Knowing how 
firmly fixed many strange customs and superstitions have 
become, we need feel no surprise that the self-regarding 
virtues, supported as they are by reason, should now 
appear to us so natural as to be thought innate, although 
they were not valued by man in his early condition. 

Notwithstanding many sources of doubt, man can 
generally and readily distinguish between the higher 
and lower moral rules. The higher are founded on the 
social instincts, and relate to the welfare of others. 
They are supported by the approbation of our fellow- 
men and by reason. The lower rules, though some of 
them when implying self-sacrifice hardly deserve to be 
called lower, relate chiefly to self, and arise from 
public opinion, matured by experience and cultivation ; 
for they are not practised by rude tribes. 

As man advances in civilisation, and small tribes are 

^ Good instances are given more fully in his ‘ Contributions 
by Mr. Wallace in ‘ Scientific to the Theory of Natural Sdec- 
Opinion,’ Sept. 15, 1869 ; and tion,’ 1870, p. 353. 


188 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


united into larger communities, the simplest reason 
would tell each individual that he ought to extend his 
social instincts and sympathies to all the members of 
the same nation, though personally unknown to him. 
This point being once reached, there is only an 
artificial harrier to prevent his sympathies extending 
to the men of all nations and races. If, indeed, such 
men are separated from him by great differences in 
appearance or habits, experience unfortunately shews 
us how^ long it is, before we look at them as our 
fellow-creatures. Sympathy beyond the confines of 
man, that is, humanity to the lower animals, seems to 
be one of the latest moral acquisitions. It is appa- 
rently unfelt by savages, except towards their pets. 
How little the old Komans knew of it is shewn by 
their abhorrent gladiatorial exhibitions. The very 
idea of humanity, as far as I could observe, was new to 
most of the Gauchos of the Pampas. This virtue, one 
of the noblest with which man is endowed, seems to 
arise incidentally from our sympathies becoming more 
tender and more widely diffused, until they are ex- 
tended to all sentient beings. As soon as this virtue is 
honoured and practised by some few men, it spreads 
through instruction and example to the young, and 
eventually becomes incorporated in public opinion. 

The highest possible stage in moral culture is when 
we recognise that we ought to control our thoughts, 
and “ not even in inmost thought to think again the 
sins that made the past so pleasant to us.” What- 
ever makes any had action familiar to the mind, 
renders its performance by so much the easier. As 
Marcus Aurelius long ago said, “ Such as are thy 
^ Tennyson, ‘ Idylls of the King,’ p. 244. 


Chap. FV. 


MORAL SENSE. 


189 


“ habitual thoughts, such also will be the character of 
“ thy mind ; for the soul is dyed by the thoughts.” 

Our great philosopher, Herbert Spencer, has recently 
explained his views on the moral sense. He says,^® 
“ I believe that the experiences of utility organised 
“ and consolidated through all past generations of the 
“ human race, have been producing corresponding 
“ modifications, which, by continued transmission and 
“ accumulation, have become in us certain faculties of 
‘‘ moral intuition — certain emotions responding to right 
“ and wrong conduct, which have no apparent basis in 
“ the individual experiences of utility.” There is not 
the least inherent improbability, as it seems to me, in 
virtuous tendencies being more or less strongly in- 
herited ; for, not to mention the various dispositions 
and habits transmitted by many of our domestic animals 
to their offspring, I have heard of authentic cases in 
which a desire to steal and a tendency to lie appeared 
to run in families of the upper ranks ; and as stealing 
is a rare crime in the wealthy classes, we can hardly 
account by accidental coincidence for the tendency 
occurring in two or three members of the same family. 
If bad tendencies are transmitted, it is probable that 
good ones are likewise transmitted. That the state of 
the body by afiecting the brain, has great influence on 
the moral tendencies is known to most of those who have 
sufi’ered from chronic derangements of the digestion or 
liver. The same fact is likewise shewn by the per- 
“ version or destruction of the moral sense being often 
“ one of the earliest symptoms of mental derange- 

40 < Thoughts of the was burn a.d. 121. 

Emperor ]M. Aurelius Antoni- Letter to Mr. Mill in Bain’.s 

nus,’ Eng. translat., 2nd edit., ‘ Mental and Moral Science/ 
1869, p. 112. Marcus Aurelius 1868, p. 722. 


190 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


“ ment; aud insanity is notoriously often inherited. 
Except through the principle of the transmission of 
moral tendencies, we cannot understand the differences 
believed to exist in this respect between the various 
races of mankind. 

Even the partial transmission of virtuous tendencies 
would be an immense assistance to the primary 
impulse derived directly and indirectly from the social 
instincts. Admitting for a moment that virtuous 
tendencies are inherited, it appears probable, at least 
in such cases as chastity, temperance, humanity to 
animals, &c., that they become first impressed on the 
mental organization through habit, instruction and 
example, continued during several generations in the 
same family, and in a quite subordinate degree, or not 
at all, by the individuals possessing such virtues 
having succeeded best in the struggle for life. My 
chief source of doubt with respect to any such in- 
heritance, is that senseless customs, superstitions, and 
tastes, such as the horror of a Hindoo for unclean 
food, ought on the same principle to be transmitted. 
I ha\e not met with any evidence in support of the 
transmission of superstitious customs or senseless 
habits, although in itself it is perhaps not less 
probable than that animals should acquire inherited 
tastes for certain kinds of food or fear of certain foes. 

Finally the social instincts, which no doubt were 
acquired by man as by the lower animals for the good 
of the community, will from the first have given to 
him some wish to aid his fellows, some feeling of 
sympathy, and have compelled him to regard their 
Maudsley Body and Mind,’ 1870, p. 60. 


Chap. IV 


MOKAL SENSE. 


19 ] 


approbation and disapprobation. Such impulses will 
have served him at a very early period as a rude rule 
of right and wrong. But as man gradually advanced 
in intellectual power, and was enabled to trace the 
more remote consequences of his actions ; as he ac- 
quired sufficient knowledge to reject baneful customs 
and superstitions ; as he regarded more and more, not 
only the welfare, but the happiness of his fellow-men ; 
as from habit, following on beneficial experience, in- 
struction and example, his sympathies became more 
tender and widely diffused, extending to men of all 
races, to the imbecile, maimed, and other useless 
members of society, and finally to the lower animals, — 
so would the standard of his morality rise higher 
and higher. And it is admitted by moralists of the 
derivative school and by some intuitionists, that the 
standard of morality has risen since an early period in 
the history of man.^® 

As a struggle may sometimes be seen going on 
between the various instincts of the lower animals, it 
is not surprising that there should be a struggle in 
man between his social instincts, with their derived 
virtues, and his lower, though momentarily stronger 
impulses or desires. This, as Mr. Galton has re- 
marked, is all the less surprising, as man has emerged 
from a state of barbarism within a comparatively 
recent period. After having yielded to some tempta- 

A writer in the ‘ North therein. 

British Review’ (July 18G9, p. See his remarkable work 

531), well capable of forming a on ‘ Hereditary Genius,’ 1869, 
sound judgment, expresses him- p. 349. The Duke of Argyll 
self strongly in favour of this ( ‘ Primeval Man,’ 1869, p. 188) 
conclusion. Mr. Lecky ( ‘ Hist. has some good remarks on the 
of Morals,’ vol. i. p. 143) seems contest in man’s nature between 
to a certain extent to coincide right and wrong. 


192 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


tion we feel a sense of dissatisfaction, shame, re* 
pentance, or remorse, analogous to the feelings caused 
by other powerful instincts or desires, when left 
unsatisfied or baulked. AVe compare the weakened 
impression of a past temptation with the ever present 
social instincts, or with habits, gained in early youth 
and strengthened during our whole lives, until they 
have become almost as strong as instincts. If with 
the temptation still before us we do not yield, it is 
because either the social instinct or some custom is at 
the moment predominant, or because we have learnt 
that it will appear to us hereafter the stronger, when 
compared with the weakened impression of the temp- 
tation, and we realise that its violation would cause us 
suffering. Looking to future generations, there is 
no cause to fear that the social instincts will grow 
weaker, and we may expect that virtuous habits will 
grow stronger, becoming perhaps fixed by inheritance. 
In this case the struggle between our higher and 
lower impulses will be less severe, and virtue will be 
triumphant. 

Summary of the last two Chapters . — There can be no 
doubt that the difference between the mind of the 
lowest man and that of the highest animal is immense. 
An anthropomorphous ape, if he could take a dis- 
passionate view of his own case, would admit that 
though he could form an artful plan to plunder a 
garden — though he could use stones for fighting or 
for breaking open nuts, yet tliat the thought of 
fashioning a stone into a tool was quite beyond his 
scope. Still less, as he would admit, could he follow 
out a train of metaphysical reasoning, or solve a 


Crajp. it. 


SUMMARY. 


193 


matliematical problem, or reflect on God, or admire 
a grand natural scene. Some apes, however, would 
probably declare that they could and did admire the 
beauty of the coloured skin and fur of their partners 
in marriage. They would admit, that though they 
could make other apes understand by cries some of 
their perceptions and simpler wants, the notion of 
expressing definite ideas by definite sounds had never 
crossed their minds. They might insist that they 
were ready to aid their fellow-apes of the same troop 
in many ways, to risk their lives for them, and to take 
charge of their orphans ; but they would be forced to 
acknowledge that disinterested love for all living 
creatures, the most noble atHribute of man, was quite 
beyond their comprehension. 

Nevertheless the difference in mind between man 
and the higher animals, great as it is, certainly is one 
of degree and not of kind. We have seen that the 
senses and intuitions, the various emotions and 
faculties, such as love, memory, attention, curiosity, 
imitation, reason, &c., of which man boasts, may be 
found in an incipient, or even sometimes in a well- 
developed condition, in the lower animals. They are 
also capable of some inherited improvement, as we see 
in the domestic dog compared with the wolf or jackal. 
If it could be proved that certain high mental powers, 
such as the formation of general concepts, self-con- 
sciousness, &c., were absolutely peculiar to man, which 
seems extremely doubtful, it is not improbable that 
these qualities are merely the incidental results of 
other highly-advanced intellectual faculties ; and these 
again mainly the result of the continued use of a 
perfect language. At what age does the new-born 


194 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


infant possess the power of abstraction, or become 
self-conscious, and reflect on its own existence? We 
cannot answer; nor can we answer in regard to the 
ascending organic scale. The half-art, half-instinct of 
language still bears the stamp of its gradual evolution. 
The ennobling belief in God is not universal with 
man; and the belief in spiritual agencies naturally 
follows from other mental powers. The moral sense 
perhaps afibrds the best and highest distinction be- 
tween man and the lower animals ; but I need say 
nothing on this head, as I have so lately endeavoured 
to shew that the social instincts, — the prime principle 
of man’s moral constitution — with the aid of active 
intellectual powers and fhe efiects of habit, naturally 
lead to the golden rule, “ As ye would that men should 
do to you, do ye to them likewise ; ” and this lies at 
the foundation of morality. 

In the next chapter I shall make some few remarks 
on the probable steps and means by which the several 
mental and moral faculties of man have been gradually 
evolved. That such evolution is at least possible 
ought not to be denied, for we daily see these faculties 
developing in every infant ; and we may trace a perfect 
gradation from the mind of an utter idiot, lower than 
that of an animal low in the scale, to the mind of a 
Newton. 

^ * The Thoughts of Maicus Aurelius,’ &c., p. 139. 


Chap. V. 


INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 


196 


CHAPTEB V. 

On the Development op the Intellectual and 
Moral Faculties during Primeval and 
Civilised Times. 

Advancement of the intellectual powers through natural selection — 
Importance of imitation — Social and moral faculties — Their 
development within the limits of the same tribe — Natuial 
selection as affecting civilised nations — Evidence that civilised 
nations were once barbarous. 

The subjects to be discussed in this chapter are of 
the highest interest, but are treated by me in an im- 
perfect and fragmentary manner. Mr. Wallace, in an 
admirable paper before referred to,^ argues that man, 
after he had partially acquired those intellectual and 
moral faculties which distinguish him from the lower 
animals, would have been but little liable to bodily 
modifications through natural selection or any other 
means. For man is enabled through his mental 
faculties ** to keep with an unchanged body in harmony 
with the changing universe.” He has great power 
of adapting his habits to new conditions of life. He 
invents weapons, tools, and various stratagems to 
procure food and to defend himself. When he migrates 
into a colder climate he uses clothes, builds sheds, and 
makes fires ; and by the aid of fire cooks food otherwise 
indigestible. He aids his fellow-men in many ways, 
^ * Anthropological Baviow,’ Maj 1804, p. elviiL 


196 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past I. 


and anticipates fntnre events. Even at a remote 
period he practised some division of labour. 

The lower animals, on the other hand, must have 
their bodily structure modified in order to survive 
under greatly changed conditions. They must be 
rendered stronger, or acquire more effective teeth or 
claws, for defence against new enemies ; or they must 
he reduced in size, so as to escape detection and 
danger. When they migrate into a colder climate, 
they must become clothed with thicker fur, or have 
their constitutions altered. If they fail to be thus 
modified, they will cease to exist. 

The case, however, is widely different, as Mr. 
Wallace has with justice insisted, in relation to the 
intellectual and moral faculties of man. These 
faculties are variable; and we have every reason to 
believe that the variations tend to be inherited. 
Therefore, if they were formerly of high importance 
to primeval man and to his ape-like progenitors, they 
would have been perfected or advanced through 
natural selection. Of the high importance of the 
intellectual faculties there can be no doubt, for man 
mainly owes to them his predominant position in the 
world. We can see, that in the rudest state of society, 
the individuals who were the most sagacious, who 
invented and used the best weapons or traps, and who 
were best able to defend themselves, would rear the 
greatest number of offspring. The tribes, which 
included the largest number of men thus endowed, 
would increase in number and supplant other tribes. 
Numbers depend primarily on the means of subsistence, 
and this depends partly on the physical nature of the 
country, but in a much higher degree on the arts 


Chap. V. 


INTILLEOTUAL FACULTIES, 


197 


which are there practised. As a tribe increases and is 
victorious, it is often still further increased by the 
absorption of other tribes.* The stature and strength 
of the men of a tribe are likewise of some importance 
for its success, and these depend in part on the nature 
and amount of the food which can be obtained. In 
Europe the men of the Bronze period were supplanted 
by a race more powerful, and, judging from their 
sword-handles, with larger hands ; * but their success 
was probably still more due to their superiority in 
the arts. 

All that we know about savages, or may infer from 
their traditions and from old monuments, the history 
of which is quite forgotten by the present inhabitants, 
shew that from the remotest times successful tribes 
have supplanted other tribes. Kelics of extinct or 
forgotten tribes have been discovered throughout the 
civilised regions of the earth, on the wild plains of 
America, and on the isolated islands in the Pacific 
Ocean. At the present day civilised nations are 
everywhere supplanting barbarous nations, excepting 
where the climate opposes a deadly barrier ; and they 
succeed mainly, though not exclusively, through their 
arts, which are the products of the intellect. It is, 
therefore, highly probable that with mankind the 
intellectual faculties have been mainly and gradually 
perfected through natural selection; and this con- 
clusion is sufficient for our purpose. Undoubtedly it 
would be interesting to trace the development of each 

* After a time the members are the co-descendants of the 
or tribes which are absorbed into same ancestors, 
another tribe assume, & Sir • Morlot, *Soc. Vaud. Sc. 
Henry Maine remarks (‘ Ancient Nat.’ 1860, p. 294. 

Law,’ 1861, p. 131), tiiat they 


198 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


separate faculty from the state in which it exists in 
the lower animals to that in which it exists in man ; 
but neither my ability nor knowledge permits the 
attempt. 

It deserves notice that, as soon as the progenitors 
of man became social (and this probably occurred at 
a very early period), the principle of imitation, and 
reason, and experience would have increased, and 
much modified the intellectual powers in a way, of 
which we see only traces in the lower animals. Apes 
are much given to imitation, as are the lowest savages ; 
and the simple fact previously referred to, that after a 
time no animal can be caught in the same place by 
the same sort of trap, shews that animals learn by 
experience, and imitate the caution of others. Now, if 
some one man in a tribe, more sagacious than the 
others, invented a new snare or weapon, or other 
means of attack or defence, the plainest self-interest, 
without the assistance of much reasoning power, would 
prompt the other members to imitate him ; and all 
would thus profit. The habitual practice of each new 
art must likewise in some slight degree strengthen the 
intellect. If the new invention were an important 
one, the tribe would increase in number, spread, and 
supplant other tribes. In a tribe thus rendered more 
numerous there would always be a rather greater 
chance of the birth of other superior and inventive 
members. If such men left children to inherit their 
mental superiority, the chance of the birth of still 
more ingenious members would be somewhat better, 
and in a very small tribe decidedly better. Even if 
they left no children, the trib6 would still include 
their blood-relations; and it has been ascertained by 


Chap. Y. 


MORAL FACULTIES. 


199 


agriculturists* that by preserving and breeding from 
the family of an animal, which when slaughtered was 
found to be valuable, the desired character has been 
obtained. 

Turning now to the social and moral faculties. In 
order that primeval men, or the ape-like progenitors of 
man, should become social, they must have acquired 
the same instinctive feelings, which impel other 
animals to live in a body; and they no doubt ex- 
hibited the same general disposition. They would 
have felt uneasy when separated from their comrades, 
for whom they would have felt some degree of love ; 
they would have warned each other of danger, and 
have given mutual aid in attack or defence. All this 
implies some degree of sympathy, fidelity, and courage. 
Such social qualities, the paramount importance of 
which to the lower animals is disputed by no one, were 
no doubt acquired by the progenitors of man in a 
similar manner, namely, through natural selection, 
aided by inherited habit. When two tribes of primeval 
man, living in the same country, came into com- 
petition, if (other circumstances being equal) the one 
tribe included a great number of courageous, sympa- 
thetic and faithful members, who were always ready to 
warn each other of danger, to aid and defend each 
other, this tribe would succeed better and conquer the 
other. Let it be borne in mind how all-important in 
the never-ceasing wars of savages, fidelity and courage 
must be. The advantage which disciplined soldiers 
have over undisciplined hordes follows chiefly from the 

* I have given instances in my ‘Variation of Animals under 
Domestication,’ vol. ii. p. 196. 


200 THE DESCENT OP MAN. Part I. 

confidence which each man feels in his comrades. 
Obedience, as Mr. Bagehot has well shewn,® is of the 
highest value, for any form of government is better 
than none. Selfish and contentious people will not 
cohere, and without coherence nothing can be effected. 
A tribe rich in the above qualities would spread and 
be victorious over other tribes: but in the course of 
time it would, judging from all past history, be in its 
turn overcome by some other tribe still more highly 
endowed. Thus the social and moral qualities would 
tend slowly to advance and be diffused throughout the 
world. 

But it may be asked, how within the limits of the 
same tribe did a large number of members first become 
endowed with these social and moral qualities, and 
how was the standard of excellence raised? It is 
extremely doubtful whether the offspring of the more 
sympathetic and benevolent parents, or of those who 
were the most faithful to their comrades, would be 
reared in greater numbers than the children of selfish 
and treacherous parents belonging to the same tribe. 
He who was ready to sacrifice his life, as many a 
savage has been, rather than betray his comrades, 
would often leave no offspring to inherit his noble 
nature. The bravest men, who were always willing to 
come to the front in war, and who freely risked their 
lives for others, would on an average perish in larger 
numbers than other men. Therefore it hardly seems 
probable, that the number of men gifted with such 
virtues, or that the standard of their excellence, could 

® See a remarkable series of Nov. 1867 ; April 1, 1868 ; 
articles on ‘ Physics and Politics,’ July 1, 1869, since separately 
in the ‘ Fortnightly Review,’ published. 


Chap. V. 


MORAL FACULTIES. 


201 


be increased through natural selection, that is, by the 
survival of the fittest ; for we are not here speaking of 
one tribe being victorious over another. 

Although the circumstances, leading to an increase 
in the number of those thus endowed within the same 
tribe, are too complex to be clearly followed out, we 
can trace some of the probable steps. In the first 
place, as the reasoning powers and foresight of the 
members became improved, each man would soon 
learn that if he aided his fellow-men, he would 
commonly receive aid in return. From this low 
motive he might acquire the habit of aiding his 
fellows ; and the habit of performing benevolent 
actions certainly strengthens the feeling of sympathy 
which gives the first impulse to benevolent actions. 
Habits, moreover, followed during many generations 
probably tend to be inherited. 

But another and much more powerful stimulus to 
the development of the social virtues, is afforded by 
the praise and the blame of our fellow-men. To the 
instinct of sympathy, as we have already seen, it is 
primarily due, that we habitually bestow both praise 
and blame on others, whilst we love the former and 
dread the latter when applied to ourselves; and this 
instinct no doubt was originally acquired, like all the 
other social instincts, through natural selection. At 
how early a period the progenitors of man in the 
course of their development, became capable of feeling 
and being impelled by, the praise or blame of their 
fellow-creatures, we cannot of course say. But it 
appears that even dogs appreciate encouragement, 
praise, and blame. The rudest savages feel the 
sentiment of glory, as they clearly show by preserving 


202 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I. 


the trophies of their prowess, by their habit of ex- 
cessive boasting, and even by the extreme care which 
they take of their personal appearance and decorations ; 
for unless they regarded the opinion of their comrades, 
such habits would be senseless. 

They certainly feel shame at the breach of some of 
their lesser rules, and apparently remorse, as shewn by 
the case of the Australian who grew thin and could 
not rest from having delayed to murder some other 
woman, so as to propitiate his dead wife’s spirit. 
Though I have not met with any other recorded case, 
it is scarcely credible that a savage, who will sacrifice 
his life rather than betray his tribe, or one who will 
deliver himself up as a prisoner rather than break his 
parole,® would not feel remorse in his inmost soul, if 
he had failed in a duty, which he held sacred. 

We may therefore conclude that primeval man, at a 
very remote period, was influenced by the praise and 
blame of his fellows. It is obvious, that the members 
of the same tribe would approve of conduct which 
appeared to them to be for the general good, and 
would reprobate that which appeared evil. To do 
good unto others — to do unto others as ye would 
they should do unto you — is the foundation-stone of 
morality. It is, therefore, hardly possible to ex- 
aggerate the importance during rude times of the love 
of praise and the dread of blame. A man who was 
not , impelled by any deep, instinctive feeling, to 
sacrifice his life for the good of others, yet was roused 
to such actions by a sense of glory, would by his 
example excite the same wish for glory in other men, 

• Mr. Wallace gives cases in of Natural Selection,’ 1870, p. 
his ‘ Contributions to the Theory 354. 


Ohap. V. 


MORAL FACULTIES. 


208 


and would strengthen by exercise the noble feeling of 
admiration. He might thus do far more good to his 
tribe than by begetting offspring with a tendency to 
inherit his own high character. 

With increased experience and reason, man perceives 
the more remote consequences of his actions, and the 
self-regarding virtues, such as temperance, chastity, 
&c., which during early times are, as we have before 
seen, utterly disregarded, come to be highly esteemed 
or even held sacred. I need not, however, repeat what 
I have said on this head in the fourth chapter. 
Ultimately our moral sense or conscience becomes a 
highly complex sentiment — originating in the social 
instincts, largely guided by the approbation of our 
fellow-men, ruled by reason, self-interest, and in later 
times by deep religious feelings, and confirmed by 
instruction and habit. 

It must not be forgotten that although a high 
standard of morality gives but a slight or no advantage 
to each individual man and his children over the other 
men of the same tribe, yet that an increase in the 
number of well-endowed men and an advancement in 
the standard of morality will certainly give an immense 
advantage to one tribe over another. A tribe including 
many members who, from possessing in a high degree 
the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, 
and sympathy, were always ready to aid one another, 
and to sacrifice themselves for the common good, 
would be victorious over most other tribes; and this 
would be natural selection. At all times throughout 
the world tribes have supplanted other tribes ; and as 
morality is one important element in their success, 
the standard of morality and the number of well- 


204 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part L 


endowed men will thns eyerywhere tend to rise and 
increase. 

It is, however, very difficult to form any judgment 
why one particular tribe and not another has been 
successful and has risen in the scale of civilisation. 
Many savages are in the same condition as when first 
discovered several centuries ago. As Mr. Bagehot has 
remarked, we are apt to look at progress as normal in 
human society ; but history refutes this. The ancients 
did not even entertain the idea, nor do the Oriental 
nations at the present day. According to another 
high authority, Sir Henry Maine, ^ “ the greatest part 
“ of mankind has never shewn a particle of desire that 
“ its civil institutions should be improved.” Progress 
seems to depend on many concurrent favourable con- 
ditions, far too complex to be followed out. But it 
has often been remarked, that a cool climate, from 
leading to industry and to the various arts, has been 
highly favourable thereto. The Esquimaux, pressed 
by hard necessity, have succeeded in many ingenious 
inventions, but their climate has been too severe for 
continued progress. Nomadic habits, whether over 
wide plains, or through the dense forests of the 
tropics, or along the shores of the sea, have in every 
case been highly detrimental. Whilst observing the 
barbarous inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, it struck 
me that the possession of some property, a fixed abode, 
and the union of many families under a chief, were the 
indispensable requisites for civilisation. Such habits 
almost necessitate the cultivation of the ground; and 
the first steps in cultivation would probably result, as 

‘ Ancient Law,’ 1861, p. 22. * Fortnightly Review,’ April 1, 

For Mr. Bagehot’s remarka, 1868, • p. 452. 


Chap. V. 


OmLISBD NATIONS. 


205 


I have elsewhere shewn,® from some such accident as 
the seeds of a fruit-tree falling on a heap of refuse, 
and producing an unusually fine variety. The problem, 
however, of the first advance of savages towards 
civilisation is at present much too difficult to be 
solved. 


Natural Selection as affecting Civilised Nations , — I have 
hitherto only considered the advancement of man from 
a semi-human condition to that of the modern savage. 
But some remarks on the action of natural selection on 
civilised nations may be worth adding. This subject 
has been ably discussed by Mr. W. K. Greg,® and 
previously by Mr. Wallace and Mr. Galton.^® Most 
of my remarks are taken from these three authors. 
With savages, the weak in body or mind are soon 
eliminated ; and those that survive commonly exhibit a 
vigorous state of health. We civilised men, on the 
other hand, do our utmost to check the process of 
elimination ; we build asylums for the imbecile, the 
maimed, and the sick ; we institute poor-laws ; and 
our medical men exert their utmost skill to save the 
life of every one to the last moment. There is reason 


* ‘The Variation of Animals 
and Plants under Domestication,’ 
vol. i. p. 309. 

* ‘Fraser’s Magazine,* Sept. 
1868, p. 353. This article seems 
to have struck many persons, 
and has given rise to two re- 
markable essays and a rejoinder 
in the ‘ Spectator,’ Oct. 3rd and 
17th, 1868. It has also been 
discussed in the ‘ Q. Journal of 
Science,’ 1869, p. 162, and by 
Mr. Lawson Tait in the ‘ Dublin 
Q. Journal of Medical Science,’ 


Feb. 1869, and by Mr. E. Kay 
Lankester in his ‘ (Comparative 
Longevity,’ 1870, p. 128. Simi- 
lar views appeared previously in 
the ‘Australasian,’ July 13, 
1867. I have borrowed ideas 
from several of these writers. 

For Mr. W allace, see ‘ An- 
thropolog. Keview,’ as before 
cited. Mr. Galton in ‘ Mac- 
millan’s Magazine,’ Aug. 1865, 
p. 318 ; also his great work, 
‘ Hereditary Genius,’ 1870. 


206 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pi^BT I. 


to believe that vaccination has preserved thousands, 
who from a weak constitution would formerly have 
succumbed to small-pox. Thus the weak members of 
civilised societies propagate their kind. No one who 
has attended to the breeding of domestic animals will 
doubt that this must be highly injurious to the race of 
man. It is surprising how soon a want of care, or 
care wrongly directed, leads to the degeneration of a 
domestic race; but excepting in the case of man 
himself, hardly any one is so ignorant as to allow his 
worst animals to breed. 

The aid which we feel impelled to give to the 
helpless is mainly an incidental result of the instinct 
of sympathy, which was originally acquired as part of 
the social instincts, but subsequently rendered, in the 
manner previously indicated, more tender and more 
widely diffused. Nor could we check our sympathy, 
even at the urging of hard reason, without deteriora- 
tion in the noblest part of our nature. The surgeon 
may harden himself whilst performing an operation, 
for he knows that he is acting for the good of his 
patient ; but if we were intentionally to neglect the weak 
and helpless, it could only be for a contingent benefit, 
with an overwhelming present evil. We must there- 
fore bear the undoubtedly bad effects of the weak 
surviving and propagating their kind ; but there 
appears to be at least one check in steady action, 
namely that the weaker and inferior members of 
society do not marry so freely as the sound ; and this 
check might be indefinitely increased by the weak in 
body or mind refraining from marriage, though this is 
more to be hoped for than expected. 

In every country in which a large standing army is 


Chap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


207 


kept up, the finest young men are taken by the con- 
scription or are enlisted. They are thus exposed to 
early death during war, are often tempted into vice, 
and are prevented from marrying during the prime of 
life. On the other hand the shorter and feebler men, 
with poor constitutions, are left at home, and con- 
sequently have a much better chance of marrying and 
propagating their kind.^^ 

Man accumulates property and bequeaths it to his 
children, so that the children of the rich have an 
advantage over the poor in the race for success, 
independently of bodily or mental superiority. On 
the other hand, the children of parents who are short- 
lived, and are therefore on an average deficient in 
health and vigour, come into their property sooner 
than other children, and will he likely to marry earlier, 
and leave a larger number of offspring to inherit their 
inferior constitutions. But the inheritance of property 
by itself is very far from an evil; for without the 
accumulation of capital the arts could not progress j 
and it is chiefly through their power that the civilised 
races have extended, and are now everywhere extending 
their range, so as to take the place of the lower races. 
Nor does the moderate accumulation of wealth interfere 
with the process of selection. When a poor man 
becomes moderately rich, his children enter trades or 
professions in which there is struggle enough, so that 
the able in body and mind succeed best. The presence 
of a body of well-instructed men, who have not to 
labour for their daily bread, is important to a degree 

“ Prof. H. Pick (‘ Einfluss good remarks on this head, and 
der Naturwissenschaft auf das on other such points. 

Recht,’ June, 1872) has some 


208 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past I. 


which cannot he over-estimated ; as all high intellectual 
work is carried on by them, and on such work, material 
progress of all kinds mainly depends, not to mention 
other and higher advantages. No doubt wealth when 
very great tends to convert men into useless drones, 
but their number is never large ; and some degree of 
elimination here occurs, for we daily see rich men, who 
happen to be fools or profligate, squandering away 
their wealth. 

Primogeniture with entailed estates is a more direct 
evil, though it may formerly have been a great 
advantage by the creation of a dominant class, and 
any government is better than none. Most eldest 
sons, though they may be weak in body or mind, 
marry, whilst the younger sons, however superior in 
these respects, do not so generally marry. Nor can 
worthless eldest sons with entailed estates squander 
their wealth. But here, as elsewhere, the relations of 
civilised life are so complex that some compensatory 
checks intervene. The men who are rich through 
primogeniture are able to select generation after 
generation the more beautiful and charming women ; 
and these must generally be healthy in body and 
active in mind. The evil consequences, such as they 
may be, of the continued preservation of the same line 
of descent, without any selection, are checked by men 
of rank always wishing to increase their wealth and 
power; and this they effect by marrying heiresses. 
But the daughters of parents who have produced 
single children, are themselves, as Mr. Galton^^ has 
shewn, apt to be sterile ; and thus noble families are 
continually cut off in the direct line, and their wealth 
“ ‘ Hereditary Genius,’ 1870, pp. 132-140. 


Chap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


209 


flows into some side channel; but unfortunately this 
channel is not determined by superiority of any kind. 

Although civilisation thus checks in many ways the 
action of natural selection, it apparently favours the 
better development of the body, by means of good 
food and the freedom from occasional hardships. This 
may be inferred from civilised men having been found, 
wherever compared, to be physically stronger than 
savages.'^ They appear also to have equal powers of 
endurance, as has been proved in many adventurous 
expeditions. Even the great luxury of the rich can be 
but little detrimental; for the expectation of life of 
our aristocracy, at all ages and of both sexes, is very 
little inferior to* that of healthy English lives in the 
lower classes.^* 

We will now look to the intellectual faculties. If in 
each grade of society the members were divided into 
two equal bodies, the one including the intellectually 
superior and the other the inferior, there can be little 
doubt that the former would succeed best in all 
occupations, and rear a greater number of children. 
Even in the lowest walks of life, skill and ability must 
be of some advantage ; though in many occupations, 
owing to the great division of labour, a very small 
one. Hence in civilised nations there will be some 
tendency to an increase both in the number and in the 
standard of the intellectually able. But I do not wish 
to assert that this tendency may not be more than 
counterbalanced in other ways, as by the multiplication 

“ Quatrefages, ‘ Revue des authorities, in the table given in 
Gouts Scientifiques,’ 1867-68, p. Mr. E. R. Lankester’s ‘ Corn- 
669. parative Longevity,’ 1870, p. 

See the fifth and sixth 115. 
columns, compiled from good 


210 


the‘ descent of man. 


Part I 


of the reckless and improvident ; but even to such as 
these, ability must be some advantage. 

It has often been objected to views like the fore- 
going, that the most eminent men who have ever lived 
have left no offspring to inherit their great intellect. 
Mr. Galton says,^® I regret I am unable to solve the 
simple question whether, and how far, men and 
“women who are prodigies of genius are infertile. I 
“have, however, shewn that men of eminence are by 
“ no means so.” Great lawgivers, the founders of 
beneficent religions, great philosophers and discoverers 
in science, aid the progress of mankind in a far higher 
degree by their works than by leaving a numerous 
progeny. In the case of corporeal structures, it is 
the selection of the slightly better-endowed and the 
elimination of the slightly less well-endowed indi- 
viduals, and not the preservation of strongly-marked 
and rare anomalies, that leads to the advancement of a 
species.^® So it will be with the intellectual faculties, 
since the somewhat abler men in each grade of society 
succeed rather better than the less able, and con- 
sequently increase in number, if not otherwise pre- 
vented. When in any nation the standard of intellect 
and the number of intellectual men have increased, we 
may expect from the law of the deviation from an 
average, that prodigies of genius will, as shewn by 
Mr. Galton, appear somewhat more frequently than 
before. 

In regard to the moral qualities, some elimination of 
the worst dispositions is always in progress even in 
the most civilised nations. Malefactors are executed, 

‘ Hereditary Genius,’ 1870, “ ‘ Origin of Species ’ (fifth 

p. 330^ edition, 1869), p. 104. 


Chap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


211 


or imprisoned for long periods, so that they cannot 
freely transmit their bad qualities. Melancholic and 
insane persons are confined, or commit suicide. Violent 
and quarrelsome men often come to a bloody end. 
The restless who will not follow any steady occupation 
— and this relic of barbarism is a great check to 
civilisation — emigrate to newly-settled countries, 
where they prove useful pioneers. Intemperance is so 
highly destructive, that the expectation of life of the 
intemperate, at the age of thirty for instance, is only 
13*8 years; whilst for the rural labourers of England 
at the same age it is 40 • 59 years.^® Profligate women 
hear few children, and profligate men rarely marry; 
both suffer from disease. In the breeding of domestic 
animals, the elimination of those individuals, though 
few in number, which are in any marked manner 
inferior, is by no means an unimportant element 
towards success. This especially holds good with 
injurious characters which tend to reappear through 
reversion, such as blackness in sheep ; and with man- 
kind some of the worst dispositions, which occasionally 
without any assignable cause make their appearance in 
families, may perhaps be reversions to a savage state, 
from which we are not removed by very many genera- 
tions. This view seems indeed recognised in the 
common expression that such men are the black sheep 
of the family. 

With civilised nations, as far as an advanced standard 

‘ Hereditary Genius,’ 1870, Statistics.’ In regard to profli- 
p. 317. ^?acy, see Dr. Farr, ‘ Influence of 

E. Ray Lankester, ‘ Com- Marriage on Mortality,’ ‘ Nat. 
parative Longevity,’ 1870, p. Assoc, for the Promotion of 
115. The table of the intern- Social Science,’ 1858. 
perate is from Nelson’s ‘ Vital 


212 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part I. 


of morality, and an increased number of fairly good 
men are concerned, natural selection apparently effects 
but little; though the fundamental social instincts 
were originally thus gained. But I have already said 
enough, whilst treating of the lower races, on the 
causes which lead to the advance of morality, namely, 
the approbation of our fellow-men — the strengthening 
of our sympathies by habit — example and imitation — 
reason — experience, and even self-interest — instruction 
during youth, and religious feelings. 

A most important obstacle in civilised countries to 
an increase in the number of men of a superior class 
has been strongly insisted on by Mr. Greg and Mr. 
Gallon,^® namely, the fact that the very poor and 
reckless, who are often degraded by vice, almost in- 
variably marry early, whilst the careful and frugal, 
who are generally otherwise virtuous, marry late in 
life, so that they may be able to support themselves 
and their children in comfort. Those who marry 
early produce within a given period not only a greater 
number of generations, but, as shewn by Dr. Duncan,^® 
they produce many more children. The children, 
moreover, that are born by mothers during the prime 
of life are heavier and larger, and therefore probably 
more vigorous, than those born at other periods. 
Thus the reckless, degraded, and often vicious mem- 
bers of society, tend to increase- at a quicker rate than 

‘Fraser’s Magazine,’ Sept. Royal Soc.,’ Edinburgh, vol. 
1868, p. 353. * Macmillan’s xxiv. p. 287 ; now published 

Magazine,’ Aug. 1865, p. 318. separately under the title of 
The Rev. F. W. Farrar Fraser’s ‘ Fecundity, Fertility, and Ste- 
Mag.,’ Aug. 1870, p. 264) takes rility,’ 1871. See, also, Mr. 
a different view. Galton, ‘ Hereditary Genius,’ pp. 

20 ‘ On the Laws of the Fer- 352-357, for observations to the 
tility of Women,’ in ‘Transact, above effect. 


Ohap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


218 


the proyident and generally yirtuous members. Or as 
Mr. Greg puts the case: ‘‘The careless, squalid, un- 
“ aspiring Irishman multiplies like rabbits : the frugal, 
“foreseeing, self-respecting, ambitious Scot, stern in 
“his morality, spiritual in his faith, sagacious and 
“ disciplined in his intelligence, passes his best years 
“ in struggle and in celibacy, marries late, and leaves 
“ few behind him. Given a land originally peopled by 
“ a thousand Saxons and a thousand Celts — and in a 
“ dozen generations five-sixths of the population would 
“ he Celts, but five-sixths of the property, of the 
“ power, of the intellect, would belong to the one- 
“ sixth of Saxons that remained. In the eternal 
“ ‘ struggle for existence,’ it would be the inferior and 
“ less favoured race that had prevailed — and prevailed 
“ by virtue not of its good qualities but of its faults.” 

There are, however, some checks to this downward 
tendency. We have seen that the intemperate suffer 
from a high rate of mortality, and the extremely 
profligate leave few offspring. The poorest classes 
crowd into towns, and it has been proved by Dr Stark 
from the statistics of ten years in Scotland, that at 
all ages the death-rate is higher in towns than in 
rural districts, “ and during the first five years of life 
“ the town death-rate is almost exactly double that of 
“ the rural districts.” As these returns include both 
the rich and the poor, no doubt more than twice the 
number of births would be requisite to keep up the 
number of the very poor inhabitants in the towns, 
relatively to those in the country. With women, 
marriage at too early an age is highly injurious ; for 

“ ‘ Tenth Annual Report of BirthB, Deaths, &c., in Scotland,’ 
1867, p. xiix. 


214 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past I. 


it has been found in France that, “twice as many 
“ wives under twenty die in the year, as died out of 
“ the same number of the unmarried.” The mortality, 
also, of husbands under twenty is “ excessively high,”^^ 
but what the cause of this may be, seems doubtful. 
Lastly, if the men who prudently delay marrying 
until they can bring up their families in comfort, were 
to select, as they often do, women in the prime of life, 
the rate of increase in the better class would be only 
slightly lessened. 

It was established from an enormous body of sta- 
tistics, taken during 1853, that the unmarried men 
throughout France, between the ages of twenty and 
eighty, die in a much larger proportion than the 
married : for instance, out of every 1000 unmarried 
men, between the ages of twenty and thirty, 11*3 
annually died, whilst of the married only 6*5 died.^^ 
A similar law was proved to hold good, during the 
years 1863 and 1864, with the entire population above 
the age of twenty in Scotland : for instance, out of 
every 1000 unmarried men, between the ages of 
twenty and thirty, 14-97 annually died, whilst of the 
married only 7*24 died, that is less than half.^* Dr. 
Stark remarks on this, “ Bachelorhood is more de- 
“ structive to life than the most unwholesome trades, 

^ These quotations are taken from the same striking paper, 
from our highest authority on I have taken the mean of 

such questions, namely, Dr. the quinquennial means, given 

Farr, in his paper ‘ On the In- in ‘ The Tenth Annual Eeport 
fluence of Marriage on the Mor- of Births, Deaths, &c., in Scot- 
tality of the French People,’ land,’ 1867. The quotation 
read before the Nat. Assoc, for from Dr. Stark is copied from 
the Promotion of Social Science, an article in the ‘ Daily News,’ 
1858. Oct. 17th, 1868, which Dr. Farr 

® Dr. Farr, ibid. The quota- considers very carefully written, 
tions given briow are extracted 


Chap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


215 


“ or than residence in an unwholesome house or district 
“ where there has never been the most distant attempt 
“at sanitary improvement.” He considers that the 
lessened mortality is the direct result of “ marriage, 
“ and the more regular domestic habits which attend 
“ that state.” He admits, however, that the intem- 
perate, profligate, and criminal classes, whose duration 
of life is low, do not commonly marry ; and it must 
likewise he admitted that men with a weak constitution, 
ill health, or any great infirmity in body or mind, will 
often not wish to marry, or will be rejected. Dr. 
Stark seems to have come to the conclusion that 
marriage in itself is a main cause of prolonged life, 
from finding that aged married men still have a 
considerable advantage in this respect over the un- 
married of the same advanced age; but every one 
must have known instances of men, who with weak 
health during youth did not marry, and yet have 
survived to old age, though remaining weak, and 
therefore always with a lessened chance of life or of 
marrying. There is another remarkable circumstance 
which seems to support Dr. Stark’s conclusion, namely, 
that widows and widowers in France suffer in com- 
parison with the married a very heavy rate of 
mortality ; but Dr. Farr attributes this to the poverty 
and evil habits consequent on the disruption of the 
family, and to grief. On the whole we may conclude 
with Dr. Farr that the lesser mortality of married 
than of unmarried men, which seems to be a general 
law, “ is mainly due to the constant elimination of 
“imperfect types, and to the skilful selection of the 
“ finest individuals out of each successive generation ; ” 
the selection relating only to the marriage state, 


216 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut 1. 


and acting on all corporeal, intellectual, and moral 
qualities.^® We may, therefore, infer that sound and 
good men who out of prudence remain for a time 
unmarried, do not suffer a high rate of mortality. 

If the various checks specified in the two last 
paragraphs, and perhaps others as yet unknown, do 
not prevent the reckless, the vicious and otherwise 
inferior members of society from increasing at a 
quicker rate than the better class of men, the nation 
will retrograde, as has too often occurred in the history 
of the world. We must remember that progress is no 
invariable rule. It is very difficult to say why one 
civilised nation rises, becomes more powerful, and 
spreads more widely, than another; or why the same 
nation progresses more quickly at one time than at 
another. We can only say that it depends on an 
increase in the actual number of the population, on 
the number of the men endowed with high intellectual 
and moral faculties, as well as on their standard of 
excellence. Corporeal structure appears to have little 
influence, except so far as vigour of body leads to 
vigour of mind. 

It has been urged by several writers that as high 
intellectual powers are advantageous to a nation, the 
old Greeks, who stood some grades higher in intellect 
than any race that has ever existed,^® ought, if the 
power of natural selection were real, to have risen still 
higher in the scale, increased in number, and stocked 

“ Dr. Duncan remarks ( ‘ Fe- “ with the sickly and unfortu- 
cundity, Fertility,’ &c., 1871, p. “ nate.” 

334) on this subject ; “ At every ^ See the ingenious and origi- 
“ age the healthy and beautiful nal argument on this subject by 
“go over from the unmarried Mr. Galton, ‘ Hereditary Genius,’ 
“ side to the married, leaving pp. 340-342. 

“ the unmarried columns crowded 


Chap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


217 


the whole of Europe. Here we have the tacit assump- 
tion, so often made with respect to corporeal structures, 
that there is some innate tendency towards continued 
development in mind and body. But development of 
all kinds depends on many concurrent favourable cir- 
cumstances. Natural selection acts only tentatively. 
Individuals and races may have acquired certain in- 
* disputable advantages, and yet have perished from 
failing in other characters. The Greeks may have 
retrograded from a want of coherence between the 
many small states, from the small size of their whole 
country, from the practice of slavery, or from extreme 
sensuality ; for they did not succumb until ‘‘ they 
“ were enervated and corrupt to the very core.” 
The western nations of Europe, who now so im- 
measurably surpass their former savage progenitors, 
and stand at the summit of civilisation, owe little or 
none of their superiority to direct inheritance from the 
old Greeks, though they owe much to the written 
works of that wonderful people. 

Who can positively say why the Spanish nation, so 
dominant at one time, has been distanced in the race. 
The awakening of the nations of Europe from the dark 
ages is a still more perplexing problem. At that early 
period, as Mr. Galton has remarked, almost all the 
men of a gentle nature, those given to meditation or 
culture of the mind, had no refuge except in the 
bosom of a Church which demanded celibacy ; and 
this could hardly fail to have had a deteriorating 

^ Mr. Greg, ‘ Fraser’s Maga- 1870, p. 257) advances argu- 
zine,’ Sept. 18C8, p. 357. ments on the other side. Sir C. 

** ‘Hereditary Genius,’ 1870, Lyell had already (‘Principles 
pp. 357-359. The Rev. F. W. of Geology,’ vol. ii. 1868, p. 489) 
Farrar ( ‘ Fraser’s Mag.,’ Aug. in a striking passage called 


218 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Past I. 


influence on each successive generation. During this 
same period the Holy Inquisition selected with extreme 
care the freest and boldest men in order to burn or 
imprison them. In Spain alone some of the best 
men — those who doubted and questioned, and without 
doubting there can be no progress — were eliminated 
during three centuries at the rate of a thousand a 
year. The evil which the Catholic Church has thus- 
effected is incalculable, though no doubt counter- 
balanced to a certain, perhaps to a large, extent in 
other ways ; nevertheless, Europe has progressed at an 
unparalleled rate. 

The remarkable success of the English as colonists, 
compared to other European nations, has been ascribed 
to their “ daring and persistent energy ; ” a result 
which is well illustrated by comparing the progress of 
the Canadians of English and French extraction; but 
who can say how the English gained their energy? 
There is apparently much truth in the belief that 
the wonderful progress of the United States, as well 
as the character of the people, are the results of 
natural selection ; for the more energetic, restless, and 
courageous men from all parts of Europe have emi- 
grated during the last ten or twelve generations to 
that great country, and have there succeeded best.^^ 
Looking to the distant future, I do not think that the 
Eev. Mr. Zincke takes an exaggerated view when he 
says : “ All other series of events — as that which 

attention to the evil influence of Magazine,’ August, 1865, p. 325. 
the Holy Inquisition in having. See also, ‘ Nature,’ ‘ On Darwin- 
through selection, lowered the ism and National Life,’ Dec. 
general standard of intelligence 1869, p. 184. 
in Europe. “ ‘ Last Winter in the United 

“ Mr. Galton, ‘ Macmillan’s States,’ 1868, p. 29. 


Ohap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


219 


“ resulted in the culture of mind in Greece, and that 
“ which resulted in the empire of Eome — only appear 
" to have purpose and value when viewed in connection 
“ with, or rather as subsidiary to ... . the great 
“stream of Anglo-Saxon emigration to the west.” 
Obscure as is the problem of the advance of civilisa- 
tion, we can at least see that a nation which produced 
during a lengthened period the greatest number of 
highly intellectual, energetic, brave, patriotic, and 
benevolent men, would generally prevail over less 
favoured nations. 

Natural selection follows from the struggle for 
existence ; and this from a rapid rate of increase. It 
is impossible not to regret bitterly, but whether 
wisely is another question, the rate at which man 
tends to increase ; for this leads in barbarous tribes to 
infanticide and many other evils, and in civilised 
nations to abject poverty, celibacy, and to the late 
marriages of the prudent. But as man suffers from 
the same physical evils as the lower animals, he has no 
right to expect an immunity from the evils consequent 
on the struggle for existence. Had he not been sub- 
jected during primeval times to natural selection, 
assuredly he would never have attained to his present 
rank. Since we see in many parts of the world 
enormous areas of the most fertile land capable of 
supporting numerous happy homes, but peopled only 
by a few wandering savages, it might be argued that 
the struggle for existence had not been sufficiently 
severe to force man upwards to his highest standard. 
Judging from all that we know of man and the lower 
animals, there has always been sufficient variability in 
their intellectual and moral faculties, for a steady 


220 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part I. 


advance through natural selection. No doubt such 
advance demands many favourable concurrent cir- 
cumstances ; but it may well he doubted whether the 
most favourable would have sufficed, had not the rate 
of increase been rapid, and the consequent struggle for 
existence extremely severe. It even appears from 
what we see, for instance, in parts of S. America, that 
a people which may be called civilised, such as the 
Spanish settlers, is liable to become indolent and to 
retrograde, when the conditions of life are very easy. 
With highly civilised nations continued progress de- 
pends in a subordinate degree on natural selection ; 
for such nations do not supplant and exterminate one 
another as do savage tribes. Nevertheless the more 
intelligent members within the same community will 
succeed better in the long run than the inferior, and 
leave a more numerous progeny, and this is a form of 
natural selection. The more efficient causes of pro- 
gress seem to consist of a good education during youth 
whilst the brain is impressible, and of a high standard 
of excellence, inculcated by the ablest and best men, 
embodied in the laws, customs and traditions of the 
nation, and enforced by public opinion. It should, 
however, be borne in mind, that the enforcement of 
public opinion depends on our appreciation of the 
approbation and disapprobation of others ; and this 
appreciation is founded on our sympathy, which it can 
hardly be doubted was originally developed through 
natural selection as one of the most important elements 
of the social instincts.®^ 

® I am much indebted to Mr. also, Broca, * Les S^ections,* 
John Morley for some good cri- ‘ Revue d’Anthropologie,’ 1872. 
ticisms on thii subject: see, 


Ohap. V. 


CIVILISED NATIONS. 


221 


O71 the evideme that all civilised nations were once 
harharous . — The present subject has been treated in so 
full and admirable a manner by Sir J. Lubbock, Mr. 
Tylor, Mr. MT<ennan, and others, that I need here 
give only the briefest summary of their results. The 
arguments recently advanced by the Duke of Argyll 
and formerly by Archbishop Whately, in favour of the 
belief that man came into the world as a civilised 
being, and that all savages have since undergone 
degradation, seem to me weak in comparison with 
those advanced on the other side. Many nations, no 
doubt, have fallen away in civilisation, and some may 
have lapsed into utter barbarism, though on this latter 
head I have met with no evidence. The Fuegians 
were probably compelled by other conquering hordes 
to settle' in their inhospitable country, and they may 
have become in consequence somewhat more degraded ; 
but it would be difficult to prove that they have fallen 
much below the Botocudos, who inhabit the finest 
parts of Brazil. 

The evidence that all civilised nations are the 
descendants of barbarians, consists, on the one side, 
of clear traces of their former low condition in still- 
existing customs, beliefs, language, &c. ; and on the 
other side, of proofs that savages are independently 
able to raise themselves a few steps in the scale 
of civilisation, and have actually thus risen. The 
evidence on the first head is extremely curious, but 
cannot be here given : I refer to such cases as that of 
the art of enumeration, which, as Mr. Tylor clearly 
shews by reference to the words still used in some 

” ‘ On the Origin of Civilisa- Nov. 26, 1867. 
tion,’ ‘ Proc. Ethnological Soc.,* ^ ‘ Primeval Man,’ 1869, 


222 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past L 


places, originated in counting the fingers, first of one 
hand and then of the other, and lastly of the toes. 
We have traces of this in our own decimal system, and 
in ' the Eoman numerals, where, after the Y., which 
is supposed to be an ahhrevated picture of a human 
hand, we pass on to YI., &c., when the other hand no 
doubt was used. So again, “ when we speak of three- 
score and ten, we are counting by the vigesimal 
“ system, each score thus ideally made, standing for 
“ 20 — for ‘ one man ’ as a Mexican or Carib would put 
‘‘ it.” According to a large and increasing school of 
philologists, every language bears the marks of its 
slow and gradual evolution. So it is with the art 
of writing, for letters are rudiments of pictorial 
representations. It is hardly possible to read Mr. 
M‘Lennan’s work®® and not admit that almost all 
civilised nations still retain traces of such rude habits 
as the forcible capture of wives. What ancient 
nation, as the same author asks, can be named that 
was originally monogamous? The primitive idea of 
justice, as shewn by the law of battle and other 
customs of which vestiges still remain, was likewise 
most rude. Many existing superstitions are the 
remnants of former false religious beliefs. The 
highest form of religion — the grand idea of God 


^ ‘ Koyal Institution of Great 
Britain,’ March 15, 1867. Also, 
‘ Researches into the Early His- 
tory of Mankind,’ 1865. 

“ ‘ Primitive Marriage,’ 1865. 
See, likewise, an excellent article, 
evidently by the same author, 
in the ‘North British Review,’ 
July, 1869. Also, Mr. L. H. 
Morgan, ‘A Conjectural Solu- 


tion of the Origin of the Class, 
System of Relationship,’ in 
‘ Proc. American Acad, of Sci- 
ences,’ vol. vii. Feb. 1868. 
Prof. Schaaffhausen (‘ Anthro- 
polog. Review,’ Oct. 1869, p. 
373) remarks on “the vestiges 
“ of human sacrifices found both 
“ in Homer and the Old Testar 
“ ment,” 


Chap. V. 


NATIONS. 


228 


hating sin and loving righteonsness — was unknown 
during primeval times. 

Turning to the other kind of evidence : Sir J. 
Lubbock has shewn that some savages have recently 
improved a little in some of their simpler arts. From 
the extremely curious account which he gives of the 
weapons, tools, and arts, in use amongst savages in 
various parts of the world, it cannot be doubted that 
these have nearly all been independent discoveries, 
excepting perhaps the art of making fire.^® The 
Australian hbomerang is a good instance of one such 
independent discovery. The Tahitians when first 
visited had advanced in many respects beyond the 
inhabitants of most of the other Polynesian islands. 
There are no just grounds for the belief that the high 
culture of the native Peruvians and Mexicans was 
derived from abroad ; many native plants were there 
cultivated, and a few native animals domesticated. 
We should bear in mind that, judging from the small 
influence of most missionaries, a wandering crew from 
some semi-civilised land, if washed to the shores of 
America, would not have produced any marked effect 
on the natives, unless they had already become some- 
what advanced. Looking to a very remote period in 
the history of the world, we find, to use Sir J. 
Lubbock’s well-known terms, a paleolithic and neolithic 
period ; and no one will pretend that the art of 
grinding rough flint tools was a borrowed one. In all 

” Sir J. Lubbock, ‘Prehistoric ” Dr. F. Muller has made 
Times,’ 2nd edit. 1869, chap. some good remarks to this effect 
XV. and xvi. et passim. See also in the ‘Reise der Novara: An- 
the excellent 9th Chapter in thropolog. Thfil,’ Abtheil. iii. 
Tylor’s ‘ Early History of Man- 1868, s. 127. 
kind,’ 2nd edit., 1870. 


224 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt L 


parts of Europe, as far east as Greece, in Palestine, 
India, Japan, New Zealand, and Africa, including 
Egypt, flint tools have been discovered in abundance; 
and of their use the existing inhabitants retain no 
tradition. There is also indirect evidence of their 
former use by the Chinese and ancient Jews. Hence 
there can hardly be a doubt that the inhabitants of 
these countries, which include nearly the whole civilised 
world, were once in a barbarous condition. To believe 
that man was aboriginally civilised and then suffered 
utter degradation in so many regions, is to take a 
pitiably low view of human nature. It is apparently 
a truer and more cheerful view that progress has been 
much more general than retrogression; that man has 
risen, though by slow and interrupted steps, from a 
lowly condition to the highest standard as yet attained 
by him in knowledge, morals and religion. 


Ohap. VL affinities AND GENEALOGY. 


225 


CHAPTEE YI. 

On the Affinities and Genealogy of Man. 

Position of man in the animal series — The natural system genea- 
logical — Adaptive characters of slight value — Various small 
points of resemblance between man and the Quadrumana — Kank 
of man in the natural system — Birthplace and antiquity of man — 
Absence of fossil connecting links — Lower stages in the genealogy 
of man, as inferred, firstly from his affinities and secondly from 
his structure — Early androgynous condition of the Yertebrata — 
Conclusion. 

Even if it be granted that the difference between man 
and his nearest allies is as great in corporeal structure 
as some naturalists maintain, and although we must 
grant that the difference between them is immense in 
mental power, yet the facts given in the earlier 
chapters appear to declare, in the plainest manner, 
that man is descended from some lower form, notwith- 
standing that connecting-links have not hitherto been 
discovered. 

Man is liable to numerous, slight, and diversified 
variations, which are induced by the same general 
causes, are governed and transmitted in accordance with 
the same general laws, as in the lower animals. Man 
has multiplied so rapidly, that he has necessarily been 
exposed to struggle for existence, and consequently 
to natural selection. He has given rise to many races, 
some of which differ so much from each other, that 
they have often been ranked by naturalists as distinct 

Q 


226 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


species. His body is constructed on the same homo- 
logical plan as that of other mammals. He passes 
through the same phases of embryological development. 
He retains many rudimentary and useless structures, 
which no doubt were once serviceable. Characters 
occasionally make their re-appearance in him, which 
we have reason to believe were possessed by his 
early progenitors. If the origin of man had been 
wholly different from that of all other animals, these 
various appearances would be mere empty deceptions ; 
but such an admission is incredible. These appear- 
ances, on the other hand, are intelligible, at least to a 
large extent, if man is the co-descendant with other 
mammals of some unknown and lower form. 

Some naturalists, from being deeply impressed with 
the mental and spiritual powers of man, have divided the 
whole organic world into three kingdoms, the Human, 
the Animal, and the Vegetable, thus giving to man a sepa- 
rate kingdom.^ Spiritual powers cannot be compared 
or classed by the naturalist : but he may endeavour to 
shew, as I have done, thnt the mental faculties of man 
and the lower animals do not differ in kind, although 
immensely in degree. A difference in degree, however 
great, does not justify us in placing man in a distinct 
kingdom, as will perhaps be best illustrated by com- 
paring the mental powers of two insects, namely, a coccus 
or scale-insect and an ant, which undoubtedly belong 
to the same class. The difference is here greater than, 
though of a somewhat different kind from, that between 
man and the highest mammal. The female coccus, 

^ Isidore Geoffrey St.-Hilaire various naturnlists in their classi- 
gives a detailed account of the fications; ‘ Hist. Nat. Gdu.’ tom. 
position assigned to man hy ii. 1859, pp. 170-189, 


Chap. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


227 


whilst young, attaches itself by its proboscis to a 
plant ; sucks the sap, but never moves again ; is 
fertilised and lays eggs ; and this is its whole history. 
On the other hand, to describe the habits and meiital 
powers of worker-ants, would require, as Pierre Huber 
has shewn, a large volume ; I may, however, briefly 
specify a few points. Ants certainly communicate 
information to each other, and several unite for the 
same work, or for games of play. They recognise their 
fellow-ants after months of absence, and feel sympathy 
for each other. They build great edifices, keep them 
clean, close the doors in the evening, and post sentries. 
They make roads as well as tunnels under rivers, and 
temporary bridges over them, by clinging together. 
They collect food for the community, and when an 
object, too large for entrance, is brought to the nest, 
they enlarge the door, and afterwards build it up again. 
They store up seeds, of which they prevent the ger- 
mination, and which, if damp, are brought up to the 
surface to dry. They keep aphides and other insects 
as milch-cows. They go out to battle in regular bands, 
and freely sacrifice their lives for the common weal. 
They emigrate according to a preconcerted plan. They 
capture slaves. They move the eggs of their aphides, 
as well as their own eggs and cocoons, into warm parts 
of the nest, in order that they may be quickly hatched ; 
and endless similar facts could be given.^ On the 
whole, the difference in mental power between an ant 
and a coccus is immense ; yet no one has ever dreamed 

* Some of the most interesting; admirable work, ‘Harvesting 
facts ever published on the habits Ants,’ &c., 1873, also ‘ L’Instinct 
of ants are given by Mr. I'elt, chez les Insectes,’ by M. George 
in his ‘ Naturalist in Nicaiagua,’ Pouchet, ‘Ilevue des Deux 
1874. See also Mr. Moggndge’s Mondes,’ Feb. 1870, p. 682, 


228 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


of placing these insects in distinct classes, much less 
in distinct kingdoms. No doubt the difference is 
bridged over by other insects ; and this is not the case 
with man and the higher apes. But we have every 
reason to believe that the breaks in the series are 
simply, the results of many forms having become 
extinct. 

Professor Owen, relying chiefly on the structure of 
the brain, has divided the mammalian series into four 
sub-classes. One of these he devotes to man ; in 
another he places both the Marsupials and the Mono- 
tremata ; so that he makes man as distinct from all 
other mammals as are these two latter groups conjoined. 
This view has not been accepted, as far as I am aware, 
by any naturalist capable of forming an independent 
judgment, and therefore need not here be further 
considered. 

We can understand why a classification founded on 
any single character or organ — even an organ so won- 
derfully complex and important as the brain — or on 
the high development of the mental faculties, is almost 
sure to prove unsatisfactory. This principle has indeed 
been tried with hymenopterous insects ; but when thus 
classed by their habits or instincts, the arrangement 
proved thoroughly artificial.^ Classifications may, of 
course, be based on any character whatever, as on size, 
colour, or the element inhabited ; but naturalists have 
long felt a profound conviction that there is a natural 
system. This system, it is now generally admitted, 
must be, as far as possible, genealogical in arrangement, 
— that is the co-descendants of the same form must be 
kept together in one group, apart from the co-descend- 

^ Westwood, ‘ Modern Class of Insects,’ vol. ii. 1840, p. 87. 


Chap. VI. AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 229 

ants of any other form ; but if the parent-forms are 
related, so will be their descendants, and the two 
groups together will form a larger group. The amount 
of difference between the several groups — that is the 
amount of modification which each has undergone — is 
expressed by such terms as genera, families, orders, 
and classes. As we have no record of the lines of 
descent, the pedigree can be discovered only by ob- 
serving the degrees of resemblance between the beings 
which are to be classed. For this object numerous 
points of resemblance are of much more importance 
than the amount of similarity or dissimilarity in a few 
points. If two languages were found to resemble each 
other in a multitude of words and points of construction, 
they would be universally recognised as having sprung 
from a common source, notwithstanding that they 
differed greatly in some few words or points of con- 
struction. But with organic beings the points of 
resemblance must not consist of adaptations to similar 
habits of life : two animals may, for instance, have had 
their whole frames modified for living in the water, 
and yet they will not be brought any nearer to each 
other in the natural system. Hence we can see how 
it is that resemblances in several unimportant struc- 
tures, in useless and rudimentary organs, or not now 
functionally active, or in an embryological condition, 
are by far the most serviceable for classification; for 
they can hardly be due to adaptations within a late 
period ; and thus they reveal the old lines of descent 
or of true affinity. 

We can further see why a great amount of modifi- 
cation in some one character ought not to lead us to 
separate widely any two organisms. A part which 


230 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


already differs much from the same part in other allied 
forms has already, according to the theory of evolution, 
varied much; consequently it would (as long as the 
organism remained exposed to the same exciting con- 
ditions) he liable to further variations of the same 
kind ; and these, if beneficial, would be preserved, and 
thus be continually augmented. In many cases the 
continued development of a part, for instance, of the 
beak of a bird, or of the teeth of a mammal, would not 
aid the species in gaining its food, or for any other 
object ; but with man we can see no definite limit to 
the continued development of the brain and mental 
faculties, as far as advantage is concerned. Therefore 
in determining the position of man in the natural 
or genealogical system, the extreme development of 
his brain ought not to outweigh a multitude of 
resemblances in other less important or quite un- 
important points. 

The greater number of naturalists who have taken 
into consideration the whole structure of man, in- 
cluding his mental faculties, have followed Blumen- 
bach and Cuvier, and have placed man in a separate 
Order, under the title of the Bimana, and therefore on 
an equality with the orders of the Quadrumana, 
Carnivora, &c. Kecently many of our best naturalists 
have recurred to the view first propounded by 
Linnaeus, so remarkable for his sagacity, and have 
placed man in the same Order with the Quadrumana, 
under the title of the Primates. The justice of this 
conclusion will be admitted : for in the first place, we 
must bear in mind the comparative insignificance for 
classification of the great development of the brain 
in man, and that the strongly-marked differences 


Chap. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


231 


between the skulls of man and the Quadrumana 
(lately insisted upon by Bischoff, Aeby, and others) 
apparently follow from their differently developed 
brains. In the second place, we must remember that 
nearly all the other and more important differences 
between man and the Quadrumana are manifestly 
adaptive in their nature, and relate chiefly to the 
erect position of man ; such as the structure of his 
hand, foot, and pelvis, the curvature of his spine, and 
the position of his head. The family of Seals offers 
a good illustration of the small importance of adaptive 
characters for classification. These animals differ from 
all other Carnivora in the form of their bodies and in 
the structure of their limbs, far more than does man 
from the higher apes ; yet in most systems, from that 
of Cuvier to the most recent one by Mr. Flower,^ seals 
are ranked as a mere family in the Order of the 
Carnivora. If man had not been his own classifier, 
he would never have thought of founding a separate 
order for his own reception. 

It would be beyond my limits, and quite beyond my 
knowledge, even to name the innumerable points of 
structure in which man agrees with the other Primates. 
Our great anatomist and philosopher. Prof. Huxley, 
has fully discussed this subject,® and conclades that 
man in all parts of his organization differs less from 
the higher apes, than these do from the lower mem- 
bers of the same group. Consequently there “is no 
“justification for placing man in a distinct order.” 

In an early part of this work I brought forward 
various facts, shewing how closely man agrees in 

* ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 18(33, p. 4. 

® ‘ Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature,’ 1863, p. 70, tt passim. 


232 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


constitution with the higher mammals ; and this 
agreement must depend on our close similarity in 
minute structure and chemical composit’xon. I gave, 
as instances, our liability to the same diseases, and to 
dhe attacks of allied parasites ; our tastes in common 
for the same stimulants, and the similar effects pro- 
duced by them, as well as by various drugs, and other 
such facts. 

As small unimportant points of resemblance between 
man and the Quadrumana are not commonly noticed 
in systematic works, and as, when numerous, they 
clearly reveal our relationship, I will specify a few 
such points. The relative position of our features is 
manifestly the same; and the various emotions are 
displayed by nearly similar movements of the muscles 
and skin, chiefly above the eyebrows and round the 
mouth. Some few expressions are, indeed, almost the 
same, as in the weeping of certain kinds of monkeys 
and in the laughing noise made by others, during 
which the corners of the mouth are drawn backwards, 
and the lower eyelids wrinkled. The external ears 
are curiously alike. In man the nose is much more 
prominent than in most monkeys ; but we may trace 
the commencement of an aquiline curvature in the 
nose of the Hoolock Gibbon ; and this in the Semnopi- 
thecus nasica is carried to a ridiculous extreme. 

The faces of many monkeys are ornamented with 
beards, whiskers, or moustaches. The hair on the 
head grows to a great length in some species of 
Semnopithecus ; ® and in the Bonnet monkey {Macacus 
radiatus) it radiates from a point on the crown, with a 
parting down the middle. It is commonly said that 

® Isid. Geoffrey, ‘ Hist. Nat. G^n.’ tom. ii. 1859, p. 217. 


Chap. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


233 


the forehead gives to man his noble and intellectual 
appearance; but the thick hair on the head of the 
Bonnet monkey terminates downwards abruptly, and 
is succeeded by hair so short and fine that at a little 
distance the forehead, with the exception of the eye- 
brows, appears quite naked. It has been erroneously 
asserted that eyebrows are not present in any monkey. 
In the species just named the degree of nakedness 
of the forehead difi“ers in different individuals; and 
Eschricht states ’ that in our children the limit between 
the hairy scalp and the naked forehead is sometimes 
not well defined ; so that here we seem to have a 
trifling case of reversion to a progenitor, in whom the 
forehead had not as yet become quite naked. 

It is well known that the hair on our arms tends to 
converge from above and below to a point at the 
elbow. This curious arrangement, so unlike that in 
most of the lower mammals, is common to the gorilla, 
chimpanzee, orang, some species of Hylobates, and even 
to some few American monkeys. But in Hylobates 
agilis the hair on the fore-arm is directed downwards 
or towards the wrist in the ordinary manner ; and in 
U. lar it is nearly erect, with only a very slight for- 
ward inclination ; so that in this latter species it is in 
a transitional state. It can hardly be doubted that 
with most mammals the thickness of the hair on the 
back and its direction, is adapted to throw off the rain; 
even the transverse hairs on the fore -legs of a dog 
may serve for this end when he is coiled up asleep. 
Mr. Wallace, who has carefully studied the habits of 
the orang, remarks that the convergence of the hair 

^ ‘Ueber die Richtung der Haare,’ &c., Muller’s ^Archiv fiir 
Anat. und Phys.’ 1837, s. 61. 


234 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


towards the elbow on the arms of the orang may be 
explained as serving to throw off the rain, for this 
animal during rainy weather sits with its arms bent, 
and with the hands clasped round a branch or over 
its head. According to Livingstone, the gorilla also 
“ sits in pelting rain with his hands over his head.” ® 
If the above explanation is correct, as seems probable, 
the direction of the hair on our own arms offers a 
curious record of our former state ; for no one supposes 
that it is now of any use in throwing off the rain ; nor, 
in our present erect condition, is it properly directed 
for this purpose. 

It would, however, be rash to trust too much to the 
principle of adaptation in regard to the direction of 
the hair in man or his early progenitors ; for it is 
impossible to study the figures given by Eschricht of 
the arrangement of the hair on the human foetus (this 
being the same as in the adult) and not agree with 
this excellent observer that other and more complex 
causes have intervened. The points of convergence 
seem to stand in some relation to those points in the 
embryo which are last closed in during development. 
There appears, also, to exist some relation between the 
arrangement of the hair on the limbs, and the course 
of the medullary arteries.® 

It must not be supposed that the resemblances 
between man and certain apes in the above and in 

• Quoted by Reade, ‘ The kinds, ‘ Hist. Nat. Ge'n.’ vol. ii. 

African Sketch Book,’ vol. i., ISo'O, p. 216, 243, Eschricht, 

1873, p. 152. ibid. s. 46, 55, 61. Owen, 

® On the hair in Hylobates, ‘ Anat. of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. 

see ‘ Nat. Hist, of Mammals,’ by p. 619. Wallace, ‘ Contributions 

C. L. Martin, 1841, p. 415. to the Theory of Natural Selec- 

Also, Isid. Geofifroy on the tion,’ 1870, p. 344. 

American monkeys and other 


Chap. VI. AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


235 


many other points — such as in having a naked fore- 
head, long tresses on the head, &c. — are all necessarily 
the result of unbroken inheritance from a common 
progenitor, or of subsequent reversion. Many of these 
resemblances are more probably due to analogous 
variation, which follows, as I have elsewhere attempted 
to shew,^® from co-descended organisms having a 
similar constitution, and having been acted on by like 
causes inducing similar modifications. With respect 
to the similar direction of the hair on the fore-arms of 
man and certain monkeys, as this character is common 
to almost all the anthropomorphous apes, it may 
probably be attributed to inheritance ; but this is not 
certain, as some very distinct American monkeys are 
thus characterised. 

Although, as we have now seen, man has no just 
right to form a separate Order for his own reception, 
he may perhaps claim a distinct Sub-order or Family. 
Prof. Huxley, in his last work,^^ divides the Primates 
into three Sub-orders ; namely, the Antbropidac with 
man alone, the Simiadae including monkeys of all 
kinds, and the Lemuridae with the diversified genera 
of lemurs. As far as differences in certain important 
points of structure are concerned, man may no doubt 
rightly claim the rank of a Sub-order ; and this rank 
is too low, if we look chiefly to his mental faculties. 
Nevertheless, from a genealogical point of view it 
appears that this rank is too high, and that man ought 
to form merely a Family, or possibly even only a Sub- 
family. If we imagine three lines of descent proceeding 

‘ Origin of Species,’ 5th edit. 348. 

1869, p. 194. ‘The Variation ‘An Introduction to the 

of Animals and Plants under Classification of Animals,’ 1869, 
Domestication,’ vol. in 1868, p. p. 99. 


236 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


from a common stock, it is quite conceivable that two 
of them might after the lapse of ages he so slightly 
changed as still to remain as species of the same 
genus, whilst the third line might become so greatly 
modified as to deserve to rank as a distinct Sub-family, 
Family, or even Order. But in this case it is almost 
certain that the third line would still retain through 
inheritance numerous small points of resemblance with 
the other two. Here, then, would occur the difficulty, 
at present insoluble, how much weight we ought to 
assign in our classifications to strongly-marked dif- 
ferences in some few points, — that is, to the amount 
of modification undergone ; and how much to close 
resemblance in numerous unimportant points, as indi- 
cating the lines of descent or genealogy. To attach 
much weight to the few but strong differences is the 
most obvious and perhaps the safest course, though it 
appears more correct to pay great attention to the 
many small resemblances, as giving a truly natural 
classification. 

In forming a judgment on this head with reference 
to man, we must glance at the classification of the 
Simiadae. This family is divided by almost all natural- 
ists into the Catarrhine group, or Old World monkeys, 
all of which are characterised (as their name expresses) 
by the peculiar structure of their nostrils, and by 
having four premolars in each jaw; and into the 
Platyrrhine group or New World monkeys (including 
two very distinct sub-groups), all of which are charac- 
terised by differently constructed nostrils, and by having 
six premolars in each jaw. Some other small differences 
might be mentioned. Now man unquestionably belongs 
in his dentition, in the structure of his nostrils, and 


Chap. VI. AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


237 


some other respects, to the Catarhine or Old World 
diyision ; nor does he resemble the Platyrhines more 
closely than the Catarhines in any characters, except- 
ing in a few of not much importance and apparently of 
an adaptive nature. It is therefore against all pro- 
bability that some New World species should have 
formerly varied and produced a man-like creature, 
with all the distinctive characters proper to the Old 
World division ; losing at the same time all its own 
distinctive characters. There can, consequently, hardly 
be a doubt that man is an off-shoot from the Old World 
Simian stem ; and that under a genealogical point of 
view he must be classed with the Catarhine diyision. 

The anthropomorphous apes, namely the gorilla, 
chimpanzee, orang, and hylobates, are by most natura- 
lists separated from the other Old World monkeys, as 
a distinct sub-group. I am aware that Gratiolet, 
relying on the structure of the brain, does not admit 
the existence of this sub-group, and no doubt it is a 
broken one. Thus the orang, as Mr. St. G. Mivart 
remarks, “ is one of the most peculiar and aberrant 
“forms to be found in the Order.” The remaining 
non-anthropomorphous Old World monkeys, are again 
divided by some naturalists into two or three smaller 
sub-groups ; the genus Semnopithecus, with its peculiar 
sacculated stomach, being the type of one such sub- 
group. But it appears from M. Gaudry’s wonderful 


“ This is nearly the same 
classification as that provisionally 
adopted by Mr. St. George Mi- 
vart (‘ Transact. Philosoj)h. Soc.’ 
1867, p. 300), who, after sepa- 
rating the Lemuridie, divides 
the remainder of the Primates 
into the Hominidse, the Simiadse 


which answer to the Catarhines, 
the Cebida?, and the Hapalidse, — 
these two latter groups answering 
to the Platyrhines. Mr. Mivart 
still abides by the same view ; 
see ‘ Nature,’ 1871, p. 481. 

‘ Transact. Zoolog. Soc.’ vol. 
vi. 1867, p. 214. 


238 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


discoveries in Attica, that during the Miocene period 
a form existed there, which connected Semnopithecus 
and Macacus ; and this probably illustrates the manner 
in which the other and higher groups were once 
blended together. 

If the anthropomorphous apes he admitted to form a 
natural sub-group, then as man agrees with them, not 
only in all those characters which he possesses in 
common with the whole Catarhine group, but in other 
peculiar characters, such as the absence of a tail and of 
callosities, and in general appearance, we may infer 
that some ancient member of the anthropomorphous 
sub-group gave birth to man. It is not probable that, 
through the law of analogous variation, a member of one 
of the other lower sub-groups should have given rise to 
a man-like creature, resembling the higher anthropo- 
morphous apes in so many respects. No doubt man, 
in comparison with most of his allies, has undergone an 
extraordinary amount of modification, chiefly in conse- 
quence of the great development of his brain and his 
erect position ; nevertheless, we should hear in mind 
that he “ is but one of several exceptional forms of 
“ Primates.” 

Every naturalist, who believes in the principle of 
evolution, will grant that the two main divisions of the 
Simiadae, namely the Catarhine and Platyrhine monkeys, 
with their sub-groups, have all proceeded from some one 
extremely ancient progenitor. The early descendants 
of this progenitor, before they had diverged to any 
considerable extent from each other, would still have 
formed a single natural group ; but some of the species 
or incipient genera would have already begun to indicate 
Mr. St. G. Mivart, ‘Transact. Phil. Soc.’ 1867, p. 410. 


Chap. VI. AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


239 


by their diverging characters the future distinctive 
marks of the Catarhine and Platyrhine divisions. Hence 
the members of this supposed ancient group would not 
have been so uniform in their dentition, or in the 
structure of their nostrils, as are the existing Catarhine 
monkeys in one way and the Platyrhines in another way. 
but would have resembled in this respect the allied 
Lemuridae, which differ greatly from each other in the 
form of their muzzles, and to an extraordinary degree 
in their dentition. 

The Catarhine and Platyrhine monkeys agree in a 
multitude of characters, as is shewn by their unques- 
tionably belonging to one and the same Order. The 
many characters which they possess in common can 
hardly have been independently acquired by so many 
distinct species; so that these characters must have 
been inherited. But a naturalist would undoubtedly 
have ranked as an ape or a monkey, an ancient form 
which possessed many characters common to the Cata- 
rhine and Platyrhine monkeys, other characters in an 
intermediate condition, and some few, perhaps, distinct 
from those now found in either group. And as man 
from a genealogical point of view belongs to the 
Catarhine or Old World stock, we must conclude, 
however much the conclusion may revolt our pride, 
that our early progenitors would have been properly 
thus designated. But we must not fall into the 

error of supposing that the early progenitor of the 

Messrs. Murie and Mivart ‘ Sammlun^. gemein. wissen. 

on the Lemuroidea, ‘Transact. Vort rage,’ 1868, s. 61. Also his 

Z 00 I 02 . Soc.’ vol. vii. 1869, p. 5. ‘ Natiirliche Schopfiingsge- 

Hackel has come to this schichte,’ 1868, in whicli he gives 

same conclusion. See ‘ Ueber in detail his views on the genea- 

die Entstehung des Men- logy of man, 

schengeschlechts,’ in Virchow’s 


240 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


whole Simian stock, including man, was identical with, 
or even closely resembled, any existing ape or monkey. 

On the Birthplace and Antiqxdty of Man . — We are 
naturally led to enquire, where was the birthplace of 
man at that stage of descent when our progenitors 
diverged from the Catarhine stock ? The fact that they 
belonged to this stock clearly shews that they in- 
habitated the Old World ; but not Australia nor any 
oceanic island, as we may infer from the laws of geo- 
graphical distribution. In each great region of the 
world the living mammals are closely related to the 
extinct species of the same region. It is therefore 
probable that Africa was formerly inhabited by 
extinct apes closely allied to the gorilla and chimpan- 
zee ; and as these two species are now man’s nearest 
allies, it is somewhat more probable that our early 
progenitors lived on the African continent than else- 
where. But it is useless to speculate on this subject ; 
for two or three anthropomorphous apes, one the 
Dryopithecus ” of Lartet, nearly as large as a man, 
and closely allied to Hylobates, existed in Europe 
during the Miocene age ; and since so remote a period 
the earth has certainly undergone many great revolu- 
tions, and there has been ample time for migration on 
the largest scale. 

At the period and place, whenever and wherever it 
was, when man first lost his hairy covering, he probably 
inhabited a hot country ; a circumstance favourable for 
the frugiferous diet on which, judging from analogy, 
he subsisted. We are far from knowing how long ago 

Dr. C. Forsyth Major, ‘ Sur Italie : ’ ‘ Soc. Ital. des Sc. Nat.’ 
les Singes Fossiles trouves on tom. xv. 1872. 


Chap. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


241 


it was when man first diverged from the Catarhine 
stock ; but it may have occurred at an epoch as remote 
as the Eocene period ; for that the higher apes had 
diverged from the lower apes as early as the Upper 
Miocene period is shewn by the existence of the Dryo- 
pithecus. We are also quite ignorant at how rapid a 
rate organisms, whether high or low in the scale, may 
be modified under favourable circumstances ; we know, 
however, that some have retained the same form during 
an enormous lapse of time. From what we see going 
on under domestication, we learn that some of the co- 
descendants of the same species may be not at all, some 
a little, and some greatly changed, all within the same 
period. Thus it may have been with man, who has 
undergone a great amount of modification in certain 
characters in comparison with the higher apes. 

The great break in the organic chain between man 
and his nearest allies, which cannot be bridged over by 
any extinct or living species, has often been advanced 
as a grave objection to the belief that man is de- 
scended from some- lower form; but this objection 
will not appear of much weight to those who, from 
general reasons, believe in the general principle 
of evolution. Breaks often occur in all parts of the 
series, some being wide, sharp and defined, others less 
so in various degrees ; as between the orang and its 
nearest allies — between the Tarsius and the other 
Lemuridae — between the elephant, and in a more strik- 
ing manner between the Ornithorhynchus or Echidna, 
and all other mammals. But these breaks depend 
merely on the number of related forms which have 
become extinct. At some future period, not very 
distant as measured by centuries, the civilised races of 


E 


242 


THE DESCENT OF :MAN. 


Part 1. 


man will almost certainly exterminate, and replace, the 
savage races throughout the world. At the same time 
the anthropomorphous apes, as Professor Schaaffhausen 
has remarked,^® will no doubt he exterminated. The 
break between man and his nearest allies will then be 
wider, for it will intervene between man in a more 
civilised state, as we may hope, even than the Cauca- 
sian, and some ape as low as a baboon, instead of as 
now between the negro or Australian and the gorilla. 

With respect to the absence of fossil remains, serving 
to connect man with his ape-like progenitors, no one 
will lay much stress on this fact who reads Sir C. 
Lyell’s discussion,^^ where he shews that in all the 
vertebrate classes the discovery of fossil remains has 
been a very slow and fortuitous process. Nor should 
it be forgotten that those regions which are the most 
likely to afford remains connecting man with some 
extinct ape-like creature, have not as yet been searched 
by geologists. 

Lower Stages in the Genealogy of Man . — We have 
seen that man appears to have diverged from the 
Catarhine or Old World division of the Simiadse, after 
these had diverged from the New World division. We 
will now endeavour to follow the remote traces of his 
genealogy, trusting principally to the mutual affinities 
between the various classes and orders, with some 
slight reference to the periods, as far as ascertained, 
of their successive appearance on the earth. The 
Lemuridse stand below and near to the Simiadae, and 
constitute a very distinct family of the Primates, or. 

Anthropological Review,’ 1865, pp. 583-585. ‘Antiquity 
April, 1867, p. 236. of Man,’ 1863, p 145. 

“ ‘Elements of Geology,’ 


Chap. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


243 


according to Hiickel and others, a distinct Order. 
This group is diversified and broken to an extra- 
ordinary degree, and includes many aberrant forms. 
It has, therefore, probably suffered much extinction. 
Most of the remnants survive on islands, such as 
Madagascar and the Malayan archipelago, where they 
have not been exposed to so severe a competition as 
they would have been on well-stocked continents. 
This group likewise presents many gradations, leading, 
as Huxley remarks,^® “ insensibly from the crown and 
“ summit of the animal creation down to creatures 
“ from which there is but a step, as it seems, to the 
“ lowest, smallest, and least intelligent of the placental 
“ mammalia.” From these various considerations it is 
probable that the Simiadm were originally developed 
from the progenitors of the existing Lemuridae ; and 
these in their turn from forms standing very low in 
the mammalian series. 

The Marsupials stand in many important characters 
below the placental mammals. They appeared at an 
earlier geological period, and their range was formerly 
much more extensive than at present. Hence the 
Placentata are generally supposed to have been derived 
from the Implacentata or Marsupials ; not, however, 
from forms closely resembling the existing Marsupials, 
but from their early progenitors. The Monotremata 
are plainly allied to the Marsupials, forming a third 
and still lower division in the great mammalian series. 
They are represented at the present day solely by the 
Ornithorhynchus and Echidna ; and these two forms 
may be safely considered as relics of a much larger 
group, representatives of which have been preserved in 

“ ‘ Man’s Place in Nature,’ p. 105. 


244 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


Australia through some favourable concurrence of 
circumstances. The Monotremata are eminently in- 
teresting, as leading in several important points of 
structure towards the class of reptiles. 

In attempting to trace the genealogy of the Mam- 
malia, and therefore of man, lower down in the series, 
we become involved in greater and greater obscurity ; 
but as a most capable judge, Mr. Parker, has remarked, 
we have good reason to believe, that no true bird or 
reptile intervenes in the direct line of descent. He 
who wishes to see what ingenuity and knowledge can 
effect, may consult Prof. Hackel’s works.^^ I will 
content myself with a few general remarks. Every 
evolutionist will admit that the five great vertebrate 
classes, namely, mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, 
and fishes, are descended from some one prototype ; 
for they have much in common, especially during their 
embryonic state. As the class of fishes is the most 
lowly organised, and appeared before the others, we 
may conclude that all the members of the . vertebrate 
kingdom are derived from some fishlike animal. The 
belief that animals so distinct as a monkey, an elephant, 
a humming-bird, a snake, a frog, and a fish, &c., could 
all have sprung from the same parents, will appear 
monstrous to those who have not attended to the recent 
progress of natural history. For this belief implies 


® Elaborate tables are given 
in bis ‘ Generelle Morphologie ’ 
(B. ii. 8. cliii. anJ s. 425) ; and 
with more especial refereoce to 
man in his ‘ Natiirliche Schop- 
funy;sgeschichte,’ 1868. Prof. 
Huxley, in reviewing this latter 
work The Academy,’ 1869, p. 


42) says, that he considers the 
phylum or lines of descent of 
the Vertebrata to be admirably 
discussed by Hackel, although 
he difters on some points. He 
expresses, also, his high estimate 
of the general tenor and spirit of 
the whole work. 


Chap. VI. AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 245 

the former existence of links binding closely together 
all these forms, now so utterly unlike. 

Nevertheless, it is certain that groups of animals 
have existed, or do now exist, which serve to connect 
several of the great vertebrate classes more or less 
closely. We have seen that the Ornithorhynchus 
graduates towards reptiles ; and Prof. Huxley has 
discovered, and is confirmed by Mr. Cope and others, 
that the Dinosaurians are in many important characters 
intermediate between certain reptiles and certain birds 
— the birds referred to being the ostrich-tribe (itself 
evidently a widely-diffused remnant of a larger group) 
and the Archeopteryx, that strange Secondary bird, 
with a long lizard-like tail. Again, according to Prof. 
Owen,^^ the Ichthyosaurians — great sea-lizards fur- 
nished with paddles — present many affinities with 
fishes, or rather, according to Huxley, with amphibians ; 
a class which, including in its highest division frogs 
and toads, is plainly allied to the Ganoid fishes. These 
latter fishes swarmed during the earlier geological 
periods, and were constructed on what is called a gene- 
ralised type, that is, they presented diversified affini- 
ties with other groups of organisms. The Lepidosiren 
is also so closely allied to amphibians and fishes, that 
naturalists long disputed in which of these two classes 
to rank it ; it, and also some few Ganoid fishes, have 
been preserved from utter extinction by inhabiting 
rivers, which are harbours of refuge, and are related 
to the great waters of the ocean in the same way that 
islands are to continents. 

Lastly, one single member of the immense and 
diversified class of fishes, namely, the lancelet or 
“ ‘ Palaeontology,’ 1860, p. 199. 


246 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


amphioxus, is so different from all other fishes, that 
Hackel maintains that it ought to form a distinct class 
in the vertebrate kingdom. This fish is remarkable 
for its negative characters ; it can hardly be said to 
possess a brain, vertebral column, or heart, &c. ; so 
that it was classed by the older naturalists amongst 
the worms. Many years ago Prof. Goodsir perceived 
that the lancelet presented some affinities with the 
Ascidians, which are invertebrate, hermaphrodite, 
marine creatures permanently attached to a support. 
They hardly appear like animals, and consist of a 
simple, tough, leathery sack, with two small projecting 
orifices. They belong to the Mulluscoida of Huxley — 
a lower division of the great kingdom of the Mollusca ; 
but they have recently been placed by some naturalists 
amongst the Vermes or worms. Their larvae somewhat 
resemble tadpoles in shape,^^ and have the power of 
swimming freely about. M. Kovalevsky has lately 
observed that the larvae of Ascidians are related to the 
Vertebrata, in their manner of development, in the 
relative position of the nervous system, and in possess- 
ing a structure closely like the chorda dorsalis of 
vertebrate animals ; and in this he has been since 
confirmed by Prof. Kupffer. M. Kovalevsky writes to 


^ At the Falkland Islands I 
had the satisfaction of seeing, 
in April 1833, and therefore sorce 
years before any other naturalist, 
the locomotive larvas of a com- 
pound Ascidian, closely allied to 
Synoicum, but apparently generi- 
cally distinct from it. The tail 
was about five times as long as 
the oblong head, and terminated 
in a very tine filament. 1 1 was, as 
sketched by me under a simple 


microscope, plainly divided by 
transverse opaque partitions, 
which I presume represent the 
great cells figured by Kovalev- 
sky. At an early stage of de- 
velopment the tail was closely 
coiled round the head of the 
larva. 

^ ‘Memoires de I’Acad. des 
Sciences de St. P^tersbourg,’ 
tom. X. No. 15, 1866. 


Chap. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


247 


me from Naples, that he has now carried these observa- 
tions yet further, and should his results be well estab- 
lished, the whole will form a discovery of the very greatest 
value. Thus, if we may rely on embryology, ever the 
safest guide in classification, it seems that we have at 
last gained a clue to the source whence the Yertebrata 
were derived.^^ We should then be justified in be- 
lieving that at an extremely remote period a group of 
animals existed, resembling in many respects the larvae 
of our present Ascidians, which diverged into two 
great branches — the one retrograding in development 
and producing the present class of Ascidians, the other 
rising to the crown and summit of the animal kingdom 
by giving birth to the Yertebrata. 

We have thus far endeavoured rudely to trace the 
genealogy of the Yertebrata by the aid of their mutual 
affinities. We will now look to man as he exists ; and 
we shall, I think, be able partially to restore the 
structure of our early progenitors, during successive 
periods, but not in due order of time. This can be 
effected by n.eans of the rudiments which man still 
retains, by the characters which occasionally make 
their appearance in him through reveision, and by 
the aid of the principles of morphology and embryology. 


“ But I am bound to add 
that some competent judges dis- 
pute this conclusion; for instance, 
M. Giard, in a series of } apers in 
the ‘ Archives de Zoologie Ex- 
peiimentale,’ for 1872. Never- 
theless, this naturalist remarks, 
]\ 281, “ L’organisation de la 
“ larve ascidienne en dehors de 
“ toute hypoth^se et de toute 
“ theorie, nous montre comment 


“la nature peut produire la dis- 
*“ position fondanientale dutype 
“ vertebre (I’existence d’une 
“ corde dorsale) chcz un inver- 
“ tebre par la seule condition 
“ vitale de Tarlaptation, et cette 
“ simple possibilite du passage 
“ supprime I'abime entre lesdeux 
“ sous-regnes, encore bien qu’en 
“ ignore par on le passage s’est 
“ fait en r^nlite.” 


248 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part I 

The various facts, to which I shall here allude, have 
been given in the previous chapters. 

The early progenitors of man must have been once 
covered with hair, both sexes having beards; their 
ears were probably pointed, and capable of movement ; 
and their bodies were provided with a tail, having the 
proper muscles. Their limbs and bodies were also 
acted on by many muscles which now only occasionally 
reappear, but are normally present in the Quadru- 
mana. At this or some earlier period, the great artery 
and nerve of the humerus ran through a supra- 
condyloid foramen. The intestine gave forth a much 
larger diverticulum or caecum than that now existing. 
The foot was then prehensile, judging from the con- 
dition of the great toe. in the foetus ; and our pro- 
genitors, no doubt, were arboreal in their habits, and 
frequented some warm, forest-clad land. The males 
had great canine teeth, which served them as formidable 
weapons. At a much earlier period the uterus was 
double ; the excreta were voided through a cloaca ; and 
the eye was protected by a third eyelid or nictitating 
membrane. At a still earlier the progenitors of man 
must have been aquatic in their habits ; for morphology 
plainly tells us that our lungs consist of a modified 
swim-bladder, which once served as a float. The clefts 
on the neck in the embryo of man show where the 
branchiae once existed. In the lunar or weekly re- 
current periods of some of our functions we apparently 
still retain traces of our primordial birthplace, a shore 
washed by the tides. At about this same early period 
the true kidneys were replaced by the corpora wolffiana. 
The heart existed as a simple pulsating vessel; and 
the chorda dorsalis took the place of a vertebral 


Chap. VI. AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


249 


column. These early ancestors of man, thus seen in 
the dim recesses of tinm, must have been as simply, or 
even still more simply organised than the lancelet or 
amphioxus. 

There is one other point deserving a fuller notice. 
It has long been known that in the vertebrate kingdom 
one sex bears rudiments of various accessory parts, 
appertaining to the reproductive system, which pro- 
perly belong to the opposite sex ; and it has now been 
ascertained that at a very early embryonic period both 
sexes possess true male and female glands. Hence 
some remote progenitor of the whole vertebrate king- 
dom appears to have been hermaphrodite or andro- 
gynous.^® But here we encounter a singular diflSculty. 
In the mammalian class the males possess rudiments 
of a uterus with the adjacent passage, in their vesiculae 
prostaticae ; they bear also rudiments of mammae, and 
some male Marsupials have traces of a marsupial sack.^^ 
Other analogous facts could be added. Are we, then, 
to s appose that some extremely ancient mammal con- 
tinued androgynous, after it had acquired the chief 
distinctions of its class, and therefore after it had 
diverged from the lower classes of the vertebrate 
kingdom ? This seems very improbable, for we have 
to look to fishes, the lowest of all the classes, to find any 


“ This is the conclusion of 
Prof. Gegenbaur, one of the 
highest authorities in compara- 
tive anatomy; see ‘Grundziige 
der vergleich. Anat.’ 1870, s. 
876. The result has been ar- 
rived at chiefly from the study 
of the Amphibia ; but it appears 
from the researches of Waldeyer 
(as quoted in ‘ Journal of Anat. 
and Phys.’ 1869, p. 161), that 


the sexual organs of even “ the 
“ higher vertebrata are, in their 
“early condition, hermaphro- 
dite.” Similar views have long 
been held by some authors, 
though until recently without 
a firm basis. 

The male Thylacinus offers 
the best instance. Owen, ‘ Ana- 
tomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. 
p. 771. 


250 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


still existent androgynous forms. That various acces- 
sory parts, proper to each sex, are found in a rudimen- 
tary condition in the opposite sex, may be explained by 
such organs having been gradually acquired by the one 
sex, and then transmitted in a more or less imperfect 
state to the other. When we treat of sexual selection, 
we shall meet with innumerable instances of this form 
of transmission, — as in the case of the spurs, plumes, 
and brilliant colours, acquired for battle or ornament 
by male birds, and inherited by the females in an 
imperfect or rudimentary condition. 

The possession by male mammals of functionally 
imperfect mammary organs is, in some respects, 
especially curious. The Monotremata have the proper 
milk-secreting glands with orifices, but no nipples ; 
and as these animals stand at the very base of the 
mammalian series, it is probable that the progenitors 
of the class also had milk-secreting glands, but no 
‘ nipples. This conclusion is supported by what is 
known of their manner of development ; for Professor 
Turner informs me, on the authority of Kblliker and 
Langer, that in the embryo the mammary glands can 
be distinctly traced before the nipples are in the least 
visible ; and the development of successive parts in the 
individual generally represents and accords with the 


Hermaphroditism has been 
observed in several specus of 
Serranus, as well as in some 
other fishes, where it is either 
normal and symmetrical, or ab- 
normal and unilateral. Di-. 
Zouteveen has given me refer- 
ences on this subject, more es. 
pecially to a paper by Prof. Hal- 
bertsma,in the ‘Transact, of the 
Dutch Acad, of Sciences,’ vol. 


xvi. Dr. Gunther doubts the 
fact, but it has now been re- 
corded by too many good ob- 
servers to be any longer disputed. 
Dr. M. Lessona writes to me, 
that he has verified the observa- 
tions made by Cavolini on Ser- 
ranus. Prof. Ercolani has re- 
cently shewn (‘ Accad. delle 
Scienze,’ Bologna, Dec. 28, 1871) 
that eels are androgynous. 


CUAP. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


251 


development of successive beings in the same line of 
descent. The Marsupials differ from the Monotremata 
by possessing nipples ; so that probably these organs 
were first acquired by the Marsupials, after they had 
diverged from, and risen above, the Monotremata, and 
were then transmitted to the placental mammals.^® 
No one will suppose that the Marsupials still remained 
androgynous, after they had approximately acquired 
their present structure. How then are we to account 
for male mammals possessing mammae ? It is possible 
that they were first developed in the females and then 
transferred to the males, but from what follows this is 
hardly probable. 

It may be suggested, as another view, that long 
after the progenitors of the whole mammalian class 
had ceased to be androgynous, both sexes yielded milk, 
and thus nourished their young; and in the case of 
the Marsupials, that both sexes carried their young 
marsupial sacks. This will not appear altogether 
improbable, if we reflect that the males of existing 
syngnathous fishes receive the eggs of the females in 
their abdominal pouches, hatch them, and afterwards, 
as some believe, nourish the young ; — that certain 


^ Prof. Gegenbaur has shewn 
(‘Jenaische Zeitschrift,’ Bd. vii. 
p. 212) that two distinct types 
of nipples prevail throughout the 
several mammalian orders, but 
that it is quite intelligible how 
both could have been derived 
from the nipples of the ]\Iar- 
supials, and the latter from those 
of the Monotremata. See, also, 
a memoir by Dr. Max Huss, on 
the mammary glands, ibid. B. 
viii. p. 176. 


^ Mr. Lockwood believes (as 
noted in ‘Quart. Journal of 
cience,’ April, 1868, p. 269), 
from what he has observed of 
the development of Hippo- 
campus, that the walls of the 
abdominal pouch of the male in 
some way afford nourishment. 
On male tishes hatching the ova 
in their mouths, see a very in- 
teresting paper by Prof. Wyman, 
in * Proc. Boston Soc. of Nat. 
Hist.’ Sept. 15, 1857 ; also Prof. 


252 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


other male fishes hatch the eggs within their mouths 
or branchial cavities ; — that certain male toads take 
the chaplets of eggs from the females, and wind them 
round their own thighs, keeping them there until the 
tadpoles are born ; — that certain male birds undertake 
the whole duty of incubation, and that male pigeons, 
as well as the females, feed their nestlings with a 
secretion from their crops. But the above suggestion 
first occurred to me from the mammary glands of male 
mammals being so much more perfectly developed than 
the rudiments of the other accessory reproductive parts, 
which are found in the one sex though proper to the 
other. The mammary glands and nipples, as they 
exist in male mammals, can indeed hardly he called 
rudimentary ; they are merely not fully developed, and 
not functionally active. They are sympathetically 
affected under the influence of certain diseases, like the 
same organs in the female. They often secrete a few 
drops of milk at birth and at puberty : this latter fact 
occurred in the curious case, before referred to, where a 
young man possessed two pairs of mammae. In man 
and some other male mammals these organs have been 
known occasionally to become so well developed during 
maturity as to yield a fair supply of milk. Now if we 
suppose that during a former prolonged period male 
mammals aided the females in nursing their off- 
spring, and that afterwards from some cause (as from 
the production of a smaller number of young) the males 
ceased to give this aid, disuse of the organs during 


Turner, in * Journal of Anat. and Maddle. C. Koyer has sug- 

Phys.’ Nov. 1, 1866, p. 78. Dr. gested a similar view in her 
Giinthcr has likewise described ‘ Origine de I’Homme,’ &c., 1870. 
similar cases. 


Chap. VI. AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


253 


maturity would lead to their becoming inactive ; and 
from two well-known principles of inheritance, this 
state of inactivity would probably be transmitted to 
the males at the corresponding age of maturity. But 
at an earlier age these organs would be left unaffected, 
so that they would be almost equally well developed in 
the young of both sexes. 

Conclusion . — Yon Baer has defined advancement or 
progress in the organic scale better than any one else, 
as resting on the amount of differentiation and speciali- 
sation of the several parts of a being, — when arrived 
at maturity, as I should be inclined to add. Now as 
organisms have become slowly adapted to diversified 
lines of life by means of natural selection, their parts 
will have become more and more differentiated and 
specialised for various functions from the advantage 
gained by the division of physiological labour. The 
same part appears often to have been modified first for 
one purpose, and then long afterwards for some other 
and quite distinct purpose ; and thus all the parts are 
rendered more and more complex. But each organism 
still retains the general type of structure of the pro- 
genitor from which it was aboriginally derived. In ac- 
cordance with this view it seems, if we turn to geo- 
logical evidence, that organisation on the whole has 
advanced throughout the world by slow and interrupted 
steps. In the great kingdom of the Yertebrata it has 
culminated in man. It must not, however, be supposed 
that groups of organic beings are always supplanted, 
and disappear as soon as they have given birth to other 
and more perfect groups. The latter, though victorious 
over their predecessors, may not have become better 


254 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


adapted for all places in the economy of nature. Some 
old forms appear to have survived from inhabiting 
protected sites, where they have not been exposed to 
very severe competition ; and these often aid us in 
constructing our genealogies, by giving us a fair idea 
of former and lost populations. But we must not fall 
into the error of looking at the existing members of 
any lowly-organised group as perfect representatives of 
their ancient predecessors. 

The most ancient progenitors in the kingdom of the 
Vertebrata, at which we are able to obtain an obscure 
glance, apparently consisted of a group of marine 
animals, resembling the larvae of existing Ascidians. 


The inhabitants of the sea- 
shore must be greatly affected by 
the tides ; animals living either 
aboutthe mean high-water mark, 
or about the mean low-water 
mark, pass through a complete 
cycle of tidal changes in a fort- 
night. Consequently, their food 
supply will undergo marked 
changes week by week. The 
vital functions of such animals, 
living under these conditions for 
many generations, can hardly fail 
to run their course in regular 
weekly periods. Now it is a 
mysterious fact that in the 
higher and now terrestrial Ver- 
tebrata, as well as in other 
classes, many normal and abnor- 
mal processes have one or more 
whole ^veeks as their periods; 
this would be rendered intelligible 
if the Vertebrata are descended 
from an animal allied to the 
existing tidal Ascidians. Many 
instances of such periodic pro- 
cesses might be given, as the 
gestation of mammals, the dura- 


tion of fevers, &c. The hatching 
of eggs affords also a good ex- 
ample, for, according to Mr. 
Bartlett (‘ Land and Water,’ Jan. 
7, 1871), the eggs of the pigeon 
are hatched in two weeks ; tliose 
of the fowl in three ; those of the 
duck in four ; those of the goose 
in five ; and those of the ostrich 
in seven weeks. As far as we can 
judge, a recurrent period, if ap- 
proximately of the right duration 
for any process or function, would 
not, when once gained, be liable 
to change ; consequently it might 
be thus transmitted through al- 
most any number of generations. 
But if the function changed, the 
period would have to change, and 
would be apt to change almost 
abruptly by a whole week. This 
conclusion, if sound, is highly re- 
markable ; for the period of ges- 
tation in each mammal, and the 
hatching of each bird’s eggs, 
and many other vital processes, 
thus betray to us the primordial 
birthplace of these animals. 


ClIAP. VI. 


AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY. 


255 


These animals probably gave rise to a group of fishes, 
as lowly organised as the lancelet ; and from these the 
Ganoids, and other fishes like the Lepidosiren, must 
have been developed. From such fish a very small 
advance would carry us on to the Amphibians. We 
have seen that birds and reptiles were once intimately 
connected together ; and the Monotremata now connect 
mammals with reptiles in a slight degree. But no one 
can at present say by what line of descent the three 
higher and related classes, namely, mammals, birds, 
and reptiles, were derived from the two lower vertebrate 
classes, namely, amphibians and fishes. In the class of 
mammals the steps are not difficult to conceive which 
led from the ancient Monotremata to the ancient 
Marsupials ; and from these to the early progenitors of 
the placental mammals. We may thus ascend to the 
Lemuridas ; and the interval is not very wide from 
these to the Simiadae. The Simiadae then branched 
off into two great stems, the New World and Old 
World monkeys; and from the latter, at a remote 
period, Man, the wonder and glory of the Universe, 
proceeded. 

Thus we have given to man a pedigree of prodigious 
length, but not, it may be said, of noble quality. The 
world, it has often been remarked, appears as if it had 
long been preparing for the advent of man : and this, 
in one sense is strictly true, for he owes his birth to a 
long line of progenitors. If any single link in this 
chain had never existed, man would not have been 
exactly what he now is. Unless we wilfully close our 
eyes, we may, with our present knowledge, approxi- 
mately recognise our parentage; nor need we feel 
ashamed of it. The most humble organism is some- 


256 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


thing much higher than the inorganic dust under oui 
feet; and no one with an unbiassed mind can study 
any living creature, however humble, without being 
struck with enthusiasm at its marvellous structure 
and properties. 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


257 


CHAPTEE VII. 

On the Eaces of Man. 

Tlie nature and value of specific characters — Application to the 
races of man — Arguments in favour of, and opposed to, ranking 
the so-called races of man as distinct species — Sub-species — 
Monogenists and polygenists — Convergence of character — 
Numerous points of resemblance in body and mind between the 
most distinct races of man — The state of man when he first 
spread over the earth — Each race not descended from a single 
pair — The extinction of races — The formation of races — The 
effects of crossing — Slight infiuence of the direct action of the 
conditions of life — Slight or no influence of natural selection — 
Sexual selection. 

It is not my intention here to describe the several 
so-called races of men ; but I am about to enquire 
what is the value of the differences between them 
under a classificatory point of view, and how they 
have originated. In determining whether two or 
more allied forms ought to be ranked as species or 
varieties, naturalists are practically guided by the fol- 
lowing considerations ; namely, the amount o: differ- 
ence between them, and whether such differences relate 
to few or many points of structure, and whether they 
are of physiological importance ; but more especially 
whether they are constant. Constancy of character is 
what is chiefly valued and sought for by naturalists. 
Whenever it can be shewn, or rendered probable, that 
the forms in question have remained distinct for a 

B 


258 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part L 


long period, this becomes an argument of much weight 
in favour of treating them as species. Even a slight 
degree of sterility between any two forms when first 
crossed, or in their ofi“spring, is generally considered 
^ as a decisive test of their specific distinctness ; and 
their continued persistence without blending within 
the same area, is usually accepted as sufficient evi- 
dence, either of some degree of mutual sterility, or 
in the case of animals of some mutual repugnance to 
pairing. 

Independently of fusion from intercrossing, the 
complete absence, in a well-investigated region, of 
varieties linking together any two closely-allied forms, 
is probably the most important of all the criterions of 
their specific distinctness ; and this is a somewhat 
different consideration from mere constancy of 
character, for two forms may be highly variable and 
yet not yield intermediate varieties. G-eographical 
distribution is often brought into play unconsciously 
and sometimes consciously ; so that forms living in 
two widely separated areas, in which most of the 
other inhabitants are specifically distinct, are them- 
selves usually looked at as distinct ; but in truth this 
affords no aid in distinguishing geographical races 
from so-called good or true species. 

Now let us apply these generally-admitted principles 
to the races of man, viewing him in the same spirit as 
a naturalist would any other animal. In regard to 
the amount of difference between the races, we must 
make some allowance for our nice powers of discrimi- 
nation gained by the long habit of observing ourselves. 
In India, as Elphinstone remarks, although a newly- 
arrived European cannot at first distinguish the 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


259 


various native races, yet they soon appear to him 
extremely dissimilar ; ^ and the Hindoo cannot at first 
perceive any difference between the several European 
nations. Even the most distinct races of man are 
much more like each other in form than would at first 
be supposed ; certain negro tribes must be excepted, 
whilst others, as Dr. Eohlfs writes to me, and as I 
have myself seen, have Caucasian features. This 
general similarity is well shewn by the French photo- 
graphs in the Collection Anthropologique du Museum 
de Paris of the men belonging to various races, the 
greater number of which might pass for Europeans, 
as many persons to whom I have shewn them have 
remarked. Nevertheless, these men, if seen alive, 
would undoubtedly appear very distinct, so that we 
are clearly much influenced in our judgment by the 
mere colour of the skin and hair, by slight differences 
in the features, and by expression. 

There is, however, no doubt that the various races, 
when carefully compared and measured, differ much 
from each other, — as in the texture of the hair, the 
relative proportions of all parts of the body,^ the 
capacity of the lungs, the form and capacity of the 
skull, and even in the convolutions of the brain.^ But 
it would be an endless task to specify the numerous 


^ ‘ History of India,’ 1841, 
vol. i. p. 323. Fafclier Ripa 
makes exactly the same remark 
with respect to the Chinese. 

^ A vast number of measure- 
ments of Whites, Blacks, and 
Indians, are given in the ‘In- 
vestigations in the Military 
and Anthropolog. Statistics of 
American Soldiers,’ by B. A. 
Gould, 1869, pp. 298-358; ‘On 


the capacity of the lungs,’ p. 
471. See also the numerous 
and valuable tables, by Dr. 
Weisbach, from the observations 
of Dr. Scherzer and Dr. Schwarz, 
in the ‘Reise der Novara: An- 
thropolog. Theil,’ 1867. 

® See, for instance, Mr. Mar- 
shall’s account of the brain of a 
Bush woman, in ‘ Phil. ’iVansact.’ 
1864, p. 519. 


260 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


points of difference. The races differ also in constitu- 
tion, in acclimatisation and in liability to certain 
diseases. Their mental characteristics are likewise 
very distinct ; chiefly as it would appear in their 
emotional, bxit partly in their intellectual faculties. 
Every one who has had the opportunity of comparison, 
must have been struck with the contrast between the 
taciturn, even morose, aborigines of S. America and 
the light-hearted, talkative negroes. There is a nearly 
similar contrast between the Malays and the Papuans,^ 
who live under the same physical conditions, and are 
separated from each other only by a narrow space of 
sea. 

We will first consider the arguments which may be 
advanced in favour of classing the races of man as 
distinct species, and then the arguments on the other 
side. If a naturalist, who had never before seen a 
Negro, Hottentot, Australian, or Mongolian, were to 
compare them, he would at once perceive that they 
differed in a multitude of characters, some of slight 
and some of considerable importance. On enquiry he 
would find that they were adapted to live under widely 
difierent climates, and that they difiered somewhat in 
bodily constitution and mental disposition. If he 
were then told that hundreds of similar specimens 
could be brought from the same countries, he would 
assuredly declare that they were as good species as 
many to which he had been in the habit of affixing 
specific names. This conclusion would be greatly 
strengthened as soon as he had ascertained that these 
forms had all retained the same character for many 
centuries ; and that negroes, apparently identical with 
* Wallace, ‘ The Malay Archipelago,’ voL ii. 1869, p. 178. 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


261 


existing negroes, had lived at least 4000 years ago.® 
He would also hear, on the authority of an excellent 
observer. Dr. Lund,® that the human skulls found in 
the caves of Brazil, entombed with' many extinct 
mammals, belonged to the same type as that now 
prevailing throughout the American Continent. 

Our naturalist would then perhaps turn to geogra- 
phical distribution, and he would probably declare 
that those forms must be distinct species, which differ 
not only in appearance, but are fitted for hot, as well as 
damp or dry countries, and for the Arctic regions. He 
might appeal to the fact that no species in the group 
next to man— namely, the Quadrumana, can resist a 
low temperature, or any considerable change of climate; 
and that the species which come nearest to man have 
never been reared to maturity, even under the tem- 
perate climate of Europe. He would be deeply im- 


® With resi^ect to the figures 
in the famous Egyptian caves 
of Abou-Simbel, M. Pouchet 
says (‘ The Plurahty of the 
Human Races,’ Eng. translat., 
1864, p. 50), that he was far 
from finding recognisable repre- 
sentations of the dozen or more 
nations which some authors be- 
lieve that they can recognise. 
Even some of the most strongly- 
marked races cannot be identi- 
fied with that degree of una- 
nimity which might have been 
expected from what has been 
written on the subject. Thus 
Messrs. Nott and Gliddon 
(‘Types of Mankind,’ p. 148), 
state that Rameses II., or the 
Great, has features superbly 
European; whereas Knox, an- 
other firm believer in the specific 
distinctness of the races of man 


(‘ Races of Man,’ 1850, p. 201), 
speaking of young Meranon (the 
same as Rameses II., as I am 
informed by Mr. Birch), insists 
in the strongest manner that he 
is identical in character with the 
Jews of Antwerp. Again, when 
I looked at the statue of Amu- 
noph III., I agreed with two 
officers of the establishment, 
both competent judges, that he 
had a strongly-marked negro 
type of features; but Messrs. 
Nott and Gliddon (ibid. p. 146, 
fig. 53), describe him as a hy- 
brid, but not of “ negro inter- 
mixture.” 

® As quoted by Nott and 
Gliddon, ‘ Types of Mankind,’ 
1854, p. 439. They give also 
corroborative evidence; but C. 
Vogt thinks that the subject 
requires further investigation. 


262 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


pressed with the fact, first noticed by Agassiz,’’ that 
the different races of man are distributed over the 
world in the same zoological provinces, as those in- 
habited by undoubtedly distinct species and genera of 
mammals. This is manifestly the case with the 
Australian, Mongolian, and Negro races of man ; in a 
less well-marked manner with the Hottentots; but 
plainly with the Papuans and Malays, who are sepa- 
rated, as Mr. Wallace has shewn, by nearly the same 
line which divides the great Malayan and Australian 
zoological provinces. The Aborigines of America range 
throughout the Continent; and this at first appears 
opposed to the above rule, for most of the productions 
of the Southern and Northern halves differ widely : yet 
some few living forms, as the opossum, range from the 
one into the other, as did formerly some of the gigantic 
Edentata. The Esquimaux, like other Arctic animals, 
extend round the whole polar regions. It should be 
observed that the amount of difference between the 
mammals of the several zoological provinces does not 
correspond with the degree of separation between the 
latter ; so that it can hardly be considered as an 
anomaly that the Negro differs more, and the American 
much less from the other races of man, than do the 
mammals of the African and American continents from 
the mammals of the other provinces. Man, it may be 
added, does not appear to have aboriginally inhabited 
any oceanic island ; and in this respect, he resembles 
the other members of his class. 

In determining whether the supposed varieties of 
the same kind of domestic animal should be ranked as 

‘ Diversity of Origin of the Human liaces,’ in the ‘ Christian 
Examiner,’ July, 1850. 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


263 


such, or as specifically distinct, that is, whether any of 
them are descended from distinct wild species, every 
naturalist would lay much stress on the fact of their 
external parasites being specifically distinct. All the 
more stress would he laid on this fact, as it would be 
an exceptional one ; for I am informed by Mr. Denny 
that the most different kinds of dogs, fowls, and 
pigeons, in England, are infested by the same species 
of Pediculi or lice. Now Mr. A. Murray has carefully 
examined the Pediculi collected in different countries 
from the different races of man ; ® and he finds that 
they differ, not only in colour, but in the structure of 
their claws and limbs. In every case in which many 
specimens were obtained the differences were constant. 
The surgeon of a whaling ship in the Pacific assured 
me that when the Pediculi, with which some Sandwich 
Islanders on board swarmed, strayed on to the bodies 
of the English sailors, they died in the course of three 
or four days. These Pediculi were darker coloured, 
and appeared different from those proper to the natives 
of Chiloe in South America, of which he gave me 
specimens. These, again, appeared larger and much 
softer than European lice. Mr. Murray procured four 
kinds from Africa, namely, from the Negroes of the 
Eastern and Western coasts, from the Hottentots and 
Kaffirs ; two kinds from the natives of Australia ; two 
from North and two from South America. In these 
latter cases it may be presumed that the Pediculi came 
from natives inhabiting different districts. With 
insects slight structural differences, if constant, are 
generally esteemed of specific value : and the fact of 
the races of man being infested by parasites, which 

* ‘Transact. R. Soc. of Edinburgh,* vol. xxii. 1861, p. 567. 


264 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part I. 


appear to be specifically distinct, might fairly be 
urged as an argument that the races themselves ought 
to be classed as distinct species. 

Our supposed naturalist having proceeded thus far 
in his investigation, would next enquire whether the 
races of men, when crossed, were in any degree sterile. 
He might consult the work^ of Professor Broca, a 
cautious and philosophical observer, and in this he 
would find good evidence that some races were quite 
fertile together, but evidence of an opposite nature in 
regard to other races. Thus it has been asserted that 
the native women of Australia and Tasmania rarely 
produce children to European men; the evidence, 
however, on this head has now been shewn to be 
almost valueless. The half-castes are killed by the 
pure blacks : and an account has lately been published 
of eleven half-caste youths murdered and burnt at the 
same time, whose remains were found by the police.^® 
Again, it has often been said that when mulattoes 
intermarry, they produce few children ; on the other 
hand, Dr. Bachman, of Charleston,^ positively asserts 
that he has known mulatto families which have inter- 
married for several generations, and have continued on 
an average as fertile as either pure whites or pure 
blacks. Enquiries formerly made by Sir C. Lyell on 


® ‘ On the Phenomena of Hy- 
bridity in the Genua Homo,’ 
Eng. translat. 1864. 

See the interesting letter by 
Mr. T. A. Murray, in the ‘ An- 
thro})olog. Review,’ April, 1868, 
. liii. In this letter Count 
trzelecki’s statement that Aus- 
tralian women who have borne 
children to a white man, are 
afterwards sterile with their own 


race, is disproved. M. A. de 
Quatrefages has also collected 
(‘ Revue des Cours Scientifiques,’ 
March, 1869, p. 239), much 
evidence that Australians and 
Europeans are not sterile when 
crossed. 

“ ‘ An Examination of Prof. 
Agassiz’s Sketch of the Nat. 
Provinces of the Animal World,’ 
Charleston, 1855, p. 44. 


Chap. VII. 


THE KACES OP MAN. 


265 


this subject led him, as he informs me, to the same 
conclusion.^^ In the United States the census for the 
year 1854 included, according to Dr. Bachman, 405,751 
mulattoes; and this number, considering all the cir- 
cumstances of the case, seems small ; but it may partly 
be accounted for by the degraded and anomalous 
position of the class, and by the profligacy of the 
women. A certain amount of absorption of mulattoes 
into negroes must always be in progress; and this 
would lead to an apparent diminution of the former. 
The inferior vitality of mulattoes is spoken of in a 
trustworthy work^^ as a well-known phenomenon ; and 
this, although a dififerent consideration from their 
lessened fertility, may perhaps be advanced as a proof 
of the specific distinctness of the parent races. No 
doubt both animal and vegetable hybrids, when pro- 
duced from extremely distinct species, are liable to 
premature death ; but the parents of mulattoes cannot 
be put under the category of extremely distinct species. 
The common Mule, so notorious for long life and 
vigour, and yet so sterile, shews how little necessary 
connection there is in hybrids between lessened 
fertility and vitality ; other analogous cases could be 
cited. 


“ Dr. Rohlfs writes to me 
that he found the mixed races 
in the Great Sahara, derived 
from Arabs, Berbers, and Ne- 
groes of tiiree tribes, extraordi- 
narily fertile. On the other 
hand, Mr. Winwood Reade in- 
forms me that the Negroes on 
the Gold Coast, though ^miring 
white men and mulattoes, have 
a maxim that mulattoes should 
not intermarry, as the children 


are few and sickly. This belief, 
as Mr. Reade remarks, deserves 
attention, as white men have 
visited and resided on the Gold 
Coast for four hundred years, so 
that the natives have had ample 
time to gain knowledge through 
3xprience. 

“ ‘ Military and Anthropolog. 
Statistics of American Soldiers,’ 
by B. A. Gould, 1869, p. 319. 


266 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


Even if it should hereafter be proved that all- the 
races of men were perfectly fertile together, he who 
was inclined from other reasons to rank them as 
distinct species, might with justice argue that fertility 
and sterility are not safe criterions of specific distinct- 
ness. We know that these qualities are easily aflfected 
by changed conditions of life, or by close inter-breeding, 
and that they are governed by highly complex laws, 
for instance, that of the unequal fertility of converse 
crosses between the same two species. With forms 
which must be ranked as undoubted species, a perfect 
series exists from those which are absolutely sterile 
when crossed, to those which are almost or completely 
fertile. The degrees of sterility do not coincide strictly 
with the degrees of difference between the parents in 
external structure or habits of life. Man in many 
respects may be compared with those animals which 
have long been domesticated, and a large body of 
evidence can be advanced in favour of the Pallasian. 
doctrine,^'^ that domestication tends to eliminate the 


‘ The Variation of Animals 
and Plants under Domestication,’ 
vol. ii. p. 109. I may here 
remind the reader that the ste- 
rility of species when crossed is 
not a specially-acquired quality, 
but, like the incapacity of certain 
trees to be grafted together, is 
incidental on other acquired 
differences. The nature of these 
differences is unknown, but they 
relate more especially to the re- 
productive system, and much 
less so to external structure or 
to ordinary differences in con- 
stitution. One important ele- 
ment in the sterility of crossed 
species apparently lies in one or 


both having been long habitu- 
ated to fixed conditions ; for we 
know that changed conditions 
have a special influence on the 
reproductive system, and we 
have good reason to believe (as 
before remarked) that the fluc- 
tuating conditions of domestica- 
tion tend to eliminate that ste- 
rility which is so general with 
species, in a natural state, when 
crossed. It has elsewhere been 
shewn by me (ibid. vol. ii. p. 
185, and ‘ Origin of Species,’ 5th 
edit. p. 317), that the sterility 
of crossed species has not been 
acquired through natural selec- 
tion : we can see that when two 


Chap. VII. 


THE KACES OF MAN. 


267 


sterility which is so general a result of the crossing of 
species in a state of nature. From these several con- 
siderations, it may be justly urged that the perfect 
fertility of the intercrossed races of man, if established, 
would not absolutely preclude us from ranking them 
as distinct species. 

Independently of fertility, the characters presented 
by the offspring from a cross have been thought to 
indicate whether or not the parent-forms ought to be 
ranked as species or varieties; but after carefully 
studying the evidence, I have come to the conclusion 
that no general rules of this kind can he trusted. The 
ordinary result of a cross is the production of a blended 
or intermediate form ; but in certain cases some of the 
offspring take closely after one parent-form, and some 
after the other. This is especially apt to occur when 
the parents differ in characters which first appeared as 
sudden variations or monstrosities.^^ I refer to this 


forms have already been ren- 
dered very sterile, it is scarcely 
possible that their sterility 
should be augmented by the 
preservation or survival of the 
more and more sterile individ- 
uals ; for, as the sterility in- 
creases, fewer and fewer offspring 
will be produced from which to 
breed, and at last only single 
individuals will be produced at 
the rarest intervals. But there 
is even a higher grade of sterility 
than this. Both Gartner and 
Kolreuter have proved that in 
genera of plants, including many 
species, a series enn be formed 
from species which, when crossed, 
yield fewer and fewer seeds, to 
species which never produce a 


single seed, but yet are affected 
by the pollen of the other species, 
as shewn by the swelling of the 
germen. It is here manifestly 
impossible to select the more 
sterile individuals, which have 
already ceased to yield seeds ; so 
that the acme of sterility, when 
the germen alone is affected, 
cannot have been gained through 
selection. This acme, and no 
doubt the other grades of ste- 
rility, are the incidental results 
of certain unknown ditferences 
in the constitution of the repro- 
ductive system of the species 
which are crossed. 

‘ The Variation of Animals,’ 
&c., vol. ii. p. 92. 


268 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I. 


point, because Dr. Kohlfs informs me that he has 
frequently seen in Africa the offspring of negroes 
crossed with members of other races, either completely 
black or completely white, or rarely piebald. On the 
other hand, it is notorious that in America mulattoes 
commonly present an intermediate appearance. 

We have now seen that a naturalist might feel him- 
self fully justified in ranking the races of man as 
distinct species ; for he has found that they are 
distinguished by many differences in structure and 
constitution, some being of importance. These differ- 
ences have, also, remained nearly constant for very 
long periods of time. Our naturalist will have been 
in some degree influenced by the enormous range of 
man, which is a great anomaly in the class of mammals, 
if mankind be viewed as a single species. He will 
have been struck with the distribution of the several 
so-called races, which accords with that of other un- 
doubtedly distinct species of mammals. Finally, 
he might urge that the mutual fertility of all the 
races has not as yet been fully proved, and even if 
proved would not be an absolute proof of their specific 
identity. 

On the other side of the question, if our supposed 
naturalist were to enquire whether the forms of man 
keep distinct like ordinary species, when mingled 
together in large numbers in the same country, he 
would immediately discover that this was by no means 
the case. In Brazil he would behold an immense 
mongrel population of Negroes and Portuguese; in 
Chiloe, and other parts of South America, he would 
behold the whole population consisting of Indians and 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


269 


Spaniards blended in various degrees.^® In many parts 
of the same continent he would meet with the most 
complex crosses between Negroes, Indians, and Euro- 
peans ; and judging from the vegetable kingdom, such 
triple crosses afford the severest test of the mutual 
fertility of the parent forms. In one island of the 
Pacific he would find a small population of mingled 
Polynesian and English blood ; and in the Fiji Archi- 
pelago a population of Polynesian and Negritos crossed 
in all degrees. Many analogous cases could be added; 
for instance, in Africa. Hence the races of man are 
not suflficiently distinct to inhabit the same country 
without fusion ; and the absence of fusion affords the 
usual and best test of specific distinctness. 

Our naturalist would likewise be much disturbed as 
soon as he perceived that the distinctive characters of 
all the races were highly variable. This fact strikes 
every one on first beholding the negro slaves in Brazil, 
who have been imported from all parts of Africa. The 
same remark holds good with the Polynesians, and with 
many other races. It may be doubted whether any 
character can be named which is distinctive of a race 
and is constant. Savages, even within the limits of 
the same tribe, are not nearly so uniform in character, 
as has been often asserted. Hottentot women offer 
certain peculiarities, more strongly marked than those 
occurring in any other race, but these are known not to 
be of constant occurrence. In the several American 
tribes, colour and hairiness differ considerably ; as does 

M. de Quatrefages has given are a much crossed race of Por- 
(‘ Anthropolog. Review,’ Jan. tuguese and Indians, with a 
1869, p. 22), an interesting ac- mixture of the blood of other 
count of the success and energy races, 
of the Paulistas in Brazil, who 


270 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past L 


colour to a certain degree, and the shape of the features 
greatly, in the Negroes of Africa. The shape of the 
skull varies much in some races and so it is with 
every other character. Now all naturalists have learnt 
by dearly bought experience, how rash it is to attempt 
to define species by the aid of inconstant characters. 

But the most weighty of all the arguments against 
treating the races of man as distinct species, is that 
they graduate into each other, independently in many 
cases, as far as we can judge, of their having inter- 
crossed. Man has been studied more carefully than 
any other animal, and yet there is the greatest possible 
diversity amongst capable judges whether he should be 
classed as a single species or race, or as two (Virey), as 
three (Jacquinot), as four (Kant), five (Blumenhach), 
six (Bufibn), seven (Hunter), eight (Agassiz), eleven 
(Pickering), fifteen (Bory St. Vincent), sixteen (Des- 
moulins), twenty-two (Morton), sixty (Crawfurd), or as 
sixty-three, according to Burke.^® This diversity of 
judgment does not prove that the races ought not to 
be ranked as species, but it shews that they graduate 
into each other, and that it is hardly possible to dis- 
cover clear distinctive characters between them. 

Every naturalist who has had the misfortune to 
undertake the description of a group of highly varying 
organisms, has encountered cases (I speak after expe- 

For instance, with, the ab- See a good discussion on 

origines of America and Ans- this subject in Waitz, ‘ Intro- 
tralia. Prof. Huxley says duct, to Anthropology,’ Eng. 
(‘ Transact. Internat. Congress translat. 1863, pp. 198-208, 
of Prehist. Arch.’ 1868, p. 105), 227. I have taken some of the 

that the skulls of many South above statements from H. Tut- 
Germans and Swiss are “as tie’s ‘Origin and Antiquity of 
“ short and as broad as those of Physical Man,’ Boston, 1866, p. 
“ the Tartars,” &c. 35. 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OP MAN. 


271 


rience) precisely like that of man ; and if of a cautious 
disposition, he will end by uniting all the forms which 
graduate into each other, under a single species ; for 
he will say to himself that he has no right to give 
names to objects which he cannot define. Cases of this 
kind occur in the Order which includes man, namely in 
certain genera of monkeys ; whilst in other genera, as 
in Cercopithecus, most of the species can be determined 
with certainty. In the American genus Cebus, the 
various forms are ranked by some naturalists as species, 
by others as mere geographical races. Now if numer- 
ous specimens of Cebus were collected from all parts 
of South America, and those forms which at present 
appear to be specifically distinct, were found to graduate 
into each other by close steps, they would usually be 
ranked as mere varieties or races ; and this course has 
been followed by most naturalists with respect to the 
races of man. Nevertheless, it must be confessed that 
there are forms, at least in the vegetable kingdom,^® 
which we cannot avoid naming as species, but which 
are connected together by numberless gradations, in- 
dependently of intercrossing. 

Some naturalists have lately employed the term 
“ sub-species ” to designate forms which possess many 
of the characteristics of true species, but which hardly 
deserve so high a rank. Now if we reflect on the 
weighty arguments above given, for raising the races 
of man to the dignity of species, and the insuperable 
difficulties on the other side in defining them, it seems 
that the term “ sub-species ” might here be used with 

Prof. Nageli has carefully Prof. Asa Gray has made analo- 
described several striking cases gous remarks on some interme- 
in his * Botanische Mittheilun- diate forms in the Compositaj of 
gen,* B. ii. 1866, ss. 294-369. N. America, 


272 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paet I. 


propriety. But from long habit the term “ race ” will 
perhaps always be employed. The choice of terms is 
only so far important in that it is desirable to use, as 
far as possible, the same terms for the same degrees 
of difference. Unfortunately this can rarely be done : 
for the larger genera generally include closely-allied 
forms, which can be distinguished only with much 
difficulty, whilst the smaller genera within the same 
family include forms that are perfectly distinct; yet 
all must be ranked equally as species. So again, species 
within the same large genus by no means resemble 
each other to the same degree : on the contrary, some 
of them can generally be arranged in little groups 
round other species, like satellites round planets.^® 

The question whether mankind consists of one or 
several species has of late years been much discussed 
by anthropologists, who are divided into the two schools 
of monogenists and polygenists. Those who do not 
admit the principle of evolution, must look at species 
as separate creations, or as in some manner as distinct 
entities ; and they must decide what forms of man they 
will consider as species by the analogy of the method 
commonly pursued in ranking other organic beings as 
species. But it is a hopeless endeavour to decide this 
point, until some definition of the term ‘‘ species ” is 
generally accepted ; and the definition must not include 
an indeterminate element such as an act of creation. 
We might as well attempt without any definition to 
decide whether a certain number of houses should be 
called a village, town, or city. We have a practical 
illustration of the difficulty in the never-ending doubts 

‘ Origin of Species,’ 5th edit. p. 68. 


CUAP. VII. 


THE KACES OF MAN. 


278 


whether many closely-allied mammals, birds, insects', 
and plants, which represent each other respectively in 
North America and Europe, should be ranked as species 
or geographical races ; and the like holds true of the 
productions of many islands situated at some little 
distance from the nearest continent. 

Those naturalists, on the other hand, who admit the 
principle of evolution, and this is now admitted by the 
majority of rising men, will feel no doubt that all the 
races of man are descended from a single primitive stock ; 
whether or not they may think fit to designate the races 
as distinct species, for the sake of expressing their 
amount of diflference.^^ With our domestic animals 
the question whether the various races have arisen 
from one or more species is somewhat different. Al- 
though it may be admitted that all the races, as well 
as all the natural species within the same genus, have 
sprung from the same primitive stock, yet it is a fit 
subject for discussion, whether all the domestic races 
of the dog, for instance, have acquired their present 
amount of difference since some one species was first 
domesticated by man ; or whether they owe some of 
their characters to inheritance from distinct species, 
which had already been differentiated in a state of 
nature. With man no such question can arise, for he 
cannot be said to have been domesticated at any par- 
ticular period. 

During an early stage in the divergence of the races 
of man from a common stock, the differences between 
the races and their number must have been small ; 
consequently as far as their distinguishing characters 

See Prof. Huxley to this effect in the ‘ Fortnightly Keview,’ 
1865, p. 275. 

T 


274 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part I. 


"are concerned, they then had less claim to rank as 
distinct species than the existing so-called races. 
Nevertheless, so arbitrary is the term of species, that 
such early races would perhaps have been ranked by 
some naturalists as distinct species, if their differences, 
although extremely slight, had been more constant 
than they are at present, and had not graduated into 
each other. 

It is however possible, though far from probable, 
that the early progenitors of man might formerly have 
diverged much in character, until they became more 
unlike each other than any now existing races; but 
that subsequently, as suggested by Vogt,^^ they con- 
verged in character. When man selects the offspring 
of two distinct species for the same object, he some- 
times induces a considerable amount of convergence, 
as far as general appearance is concerned. This is the 
case, as shown by Von Nathusius,^^ with the improved 
breeds of the pig, which are descended from two 
distinct species ; and in a less marked manner with 
the improved breeds of cattle. A great anatomist, 
Gratiolet, maintains that the anthropomorphous apes 
do not form a natural sub-group ; but that the orang 
is a highly developed gibbon or semnopithecus, the 
chimpanzee a highly developed macacus, and the 
gorilla a highly developed mandrill. If this con- 
clusion, which rests almost exclusively on brain- 
characters, be admitted, we should have a case of 
convergence at least in external characters, for the 

‘ Lectures on Man,’ Eng. del,’ 1864, s. 104. With respect 
translar. 1864, p. 468. to cattle, see M. de Qaatrefages, 

® ‘ Die Racen des Schweines,’ ‘Unitd de I’Espece Humaine,’ 
1860, 8. 46. ‘Vorstudien fur 1861, p. 119. 

Geschichte, &c., Schweinescha- 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


275 


anthropomorphous apes are certainly more like each 
other in many points, than they are to other apes. 
All analogical resemblances, as of a whale to a fish, 
may indeed be said to be cases of convergence ; but 
this term has never been applied to superficial and 
adaptive resemblances. It would, however, be ex- 
tremely rash to attribute to convergence close simi- 
larity of character in many points of structure 
amongst the modified descendants of widely distinct 
beings. The form of a crystal is determined solely by 
the molecular forces, and it is not surprising that 
dissimilar substances should sometimes assume the 
same form ; but with organic beings we should bear in 
mind that the form of each depends on an infinity of 
complex relations, namely on variations, due to causes 
far too intricate to be followed, — on the nature of the 
variations preserved, these depending on the physical 
conditions, and still more on the surrounding or- 
ganisms which compete with each, — and lastly, on 
inheritance (in itself a fluctuating element) from 
innumerable progenitors, all of which have had their 
forms determined through equally complex relations. 
It appears incredible that the modified descendants of 
two organisms, if these differed from each other in a 
marked manner, should ever afterwards converge so 
closely as to lead to a near approach to identity 
throughout their whole organisation. In the case of 
the convergent races of pigs above referred to, evi- 
dence of their descent from two primitive stocks is, 
according to Von Nathusius, still plainly retained, in 
certain bones of their skulls. If the races of man had 
descended, as is supposed by some naturalists, from 
two or more species, which differed from each other as 


276 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Past I. 


much, or nearly as much, as does the orang from the 
gorilla, it can hardly he doubted that marked differ- 
ences in the structure of certain bones would still be 
discoverable in man as he now exists. 

Although the existing races of man differ in many 
respects, as in colour, hair, shape of skull, proportions 
of the body, &c., yet if their whole structure be taken 
into consideration they are found to resemble each 
other closely in a multitude of points. Many of these 
are of so unimportant or of so singular a nature, that 
it is extremely improbable that they should have been 
independently acquired by aboriginally distinct species 
or races. The same remark holds good with equal or 
greater force with respect to the numerous points of 
mental similarity between the most distinct races of 
man. The American aborigines, Negroes and Euro- 
peans are as different from each other in mind as any 
three races that can be named ; yet I was incessantly 
struck, whilst living with the Fuegians on board the 
“ Beagle,” with the many little traits of character, 
shewing how similar their minds were to ours ; and so 
it was with a full-blooded negro with whom I hap- 
pened once to be intimate. 

He who will read Mr. Tylor’s and Sir J. Lubbock’s 
interesting works^"^ can hardly fail to be deeply im- 
pressed with the close similarity between the men of 
all races in tastes, dispositions and habits. This is 
shewn by the pleasure which they all take in dancing, 
rude music, acting, painting, tattooing, and otherwise 

^ Tylor’is ‘Early History of Lubbock’s ‘Prehistoric Times,’ 
Mankind,’ 1865 : with res^Dect 2nd edit. 1869. 
to gesture-language, see p. 54. 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


277 


decorating themselves ; in their mutual comprehension 
of gesture-language, by the same expression in their 
features, and by the same inarticulate cries, when 
excited by the same emotions. This similarity, or 
rather identity, is striking, when contrasted with the 
different expressions and cries made by distinct species 
of monkeys. There is good evidence that the art of 
shooting with bows and arrows has not been handed 
down from any common progenitor of mankind, yet as 
Westropp and Nilsson have remarked,^^ the stone 
arrow-heads, brought from the most distant parts of 
the world, and manufactured at the most remote 
periods, are almost identical ; and this fact can only 
be accounted for by the various races having similar 
inventive or mental powers. The same observation 
has been made by archaeologists^® with respect to 
certain widely-prevalent ornaments, such as zig-zags, 
&c. ; and with respect to various simple beliefs and 
customs, such as the burying of the dead under 
megalithic structures. I remember observing in South 
America,^’ that there, as in so many other parts of 
the world, men have generally chosen the summits 
of lofty hills, to throw up piles of stones, either as a 
record of some remarkable event, or for burying their 
dead. 

Now when naturalists observe a close agreement in 
numerous small details of habits, tastes, and dis- 
positions between two or more domestic races, or 

“ ‘On Analogous Forms of “ Westropp, ‘ On Cromlechs,’ 

Imi)lemeDts,’ in ‘ Memoirs of &c., ‘ Journal of Ethnological 

Anthropolog. Soc.’ by H. M. Soc.’ as given in ‘ Scientific 
Westropp. ‘The Primitive In- Opinion,’ June 2nd, 1869, p. 3. 
habitants of Scandinavia,’ Eng. ^ ‘ Journal of Researches : 

translat. edited by Sir J. Lub- Voyage of the “ Beagle,” ’ p. 46. 

bock, 1868, p. 104. 


278 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part L 

between nearly-allied natural forms, they use this 
fact as an argument that they are descended from a 
common progenitor who was thus endowed ; and con- 
sequently that all should be classed under the same 
species. The same argument may be applied with 
much force to the races of man. 

As it is improbable that the numerous and un- 
important points of resemblance between the several 
races of man in bodily structure and mental faculties 
(I do not here refer to similar customs) should all have 
been independently acquired, they must have been 
inherited from progenitors who had these same cha- 
racters. We thus gain some insight into the early 
state of man, before he had spread step by step over 
the face of the earth. The spreading of man to 
regions widely separated by the sea, no doubt, pre- 
ceded any great amount of divergence of character in 
the several races ; for otherwise we should sometimes 
meet with the same race in distinct continents ; and 
this is never the case. Sir J. Lubbock, after com- 
paring the arts now practised by savages in all parts 
of the world, specifies those which man could not have 
known, when he first wandered from his original birth- 
place ; for if once learnt they would never have been 
forgotten.^® He thus shews that ‘‘ the spear, which is 
but a development of the knife-point, and the club, 
which is but a long hammer, are the only things left.” 
He admits, however, that the art of making fire pro- 
bably had been already discovered, for it is common 
to all the races now existing, and was known to the 
ancient cave-inhabitants of Europe. Perhaps the art 
of making rude canoes or rafts was likewise known ; 

“ ‘ Prehistoric Times,’ 1869, p, 674. 


Chap. VII. 


THE RACES OF MAN. 


279 


but as man existed at a remote epoch, when the land 
in many places stood at a very different level to what 
it does now, he would have been able, without the aid 
of canoes, to have spread widely. Sir J. Lubbock 
further remarks how improbable it is that our earliest 
ancestors could have “ counted as high as ten, con- 
“ sidering that so many races now in existence cannot 
“ get beyond four.” Nevertheless, at this early period, 
the intellectual and social faculties of man could 
hardly have been inferior in any extreme degree to 
those possessed at present by the lowest savages; 
otherwise primeval man could not have been so 
eminently successful in the struggle for life, as proved 
by his early and wide diffusion. 

From the fundamental differences between certain 
languages, some philologists have inferred that when 
man first became widely diffused, he was not a 
speaking animal ; but it may be suspected that lan- 
guages, far less perfect than any now spoken, aided by 
gestures, might have been used, and yet have left 
no traces on subsequent and more highly-developed 
tongues. Without the use of some language, however 
imperfect, it appears doubtful whether man’s intel- 
lect could have risen to the standard implied by his 
dominant position at an early period. 

Whether primeval man, when he possessed but few 
arts, and those of the rudest kind, and when his power 
of language was extremely imperfect, would have 
deserved to be called man, must depend on the 
definition which we employ. In a series of forms 
graduating insensibly from some ape-like creature to 
man as he now exists, it would be impossible to fix on 
any definite point when the term “ man ” ought to be 


280 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


used. But this is a matter of very little importance. 
So again, it is almost a matter of indiJfference whether 
the so-called races of man are thus designated, or are 
ranked as species or sub-species ; but the latter term 
appears the more appropriate. Finally, we may con- 
clude that when the principle of evolution is generally 
accepted, as it surely will be before long, the dispute 
between the monogenists and the polygenists will die 
a silent and unobserved death. 

One other question ought not to be passed over 
without notice, namely, whether, as is sometimes 
assumed, each sub-species or race of man has sprung 
from a single pair of progenitors. With our domestic 
animals a new race can readily be formed by carefully 
matching the varying offspring from a single pair, or 
even from a single individual possessing some new 
charactei ; but most of our races have been formed, 
not intentionally from a selected pair, but un- 
consciously by the preservation of many individuals 
which have varied, however slightly, in some useful or 
desired manner. If in one country stronger and 
heavier horses, and in another country lighter and 
fleeter ones, were habitually preferred, we may feel 
sure that two distinct sub-breeds would be produced in 
the course of time, without any one pair having been 
separated and bred from, in either country. Many 
races have been thus formed, and their manner of 
formation is closely analogous to that of natural 
species. We know, also, that the horses taken to the 
Falkland Islands have, during successive generations, 
become smaller and weaker, whilst those which have 
run wild on the Pampas have acquired larger and 


Chap. VII. 


THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 


281 


coarser heads ; and such changes are manifestly due, 
not to any one pair, but to all the individuals having 
been subjected to the same conditions, aided, perhaps, 
by the principle of reversion. The new sub-breeds in 
such cases are not descended from any single pair, but 
from many individuals which have varied in different 
degrees, but in the same general manner ; and we may 
conclude that the races of man have been similarly 
produced, the modidcations being either the direct 
result of exposure to different conditions, or the 
indirect result of some form of selection. But to this 
latter subject we shall presently return. 

On the Extinction of the Races of Man . — The partial 
or complete extinction of many races and sub-races of 
man is historically known. Humboldt saw in South 
America a parrot which was the sole living creature 
that could speak a word of the language of a lost tribe. 
Ancient monuments and stone implements found in all 
parts of the world, about which no tradition has been 
preserved by the present inhabitants, indicate much 
extinction. Some small and broken tribes, remnants 
of former races, still survive in isolated and generally 
mountainous districts. In Europe the ancient races 
were all, according to Schaaffhausen,^® “ lower in the 
“ scale than the rudest living savages ; ” they must 
therefore have differed, to a certain extent, from any 
existing race. The remains described by Professor 
Broca from Les Eyzies, though they unfortunately 
appear to have belonged to a single family, indicate 
a race with a most singular combination of low 
or simious, and of high characteristics. This race 

“ Translation in ‘ AnthroiX>logical Review,’ Oct. 1868, p. 431. 


282 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt I. 


is “ entirely different from any other, ancient or 
“modern, that we have heard of.”^° It differed, 
therefore, from the quaternary race of the caverns of 
Belgium. 

Man can long resist conditions which appear ex- 
tremely unfavourable for his existence.®^ .He has long 
lived in the extreme regions of the North, with no 
wood for his canoes or implements, and with only 
blubber as fuel, and melted snow as drink. In the 
southern extremity of America the Fuegians survive 
without the protection of clothes, or of any building 
worthy to be called a hovel. In South Africa the 
aborigines wander over arid plains, where dangerous 
beasts abound. Man can withstand the deadly influence 
of the Terai at the foot of the Himalaya, and the 
pestilential shores of tropical Africa. 

Extinction follows chiefly from the competition of 
tribe with tribe, and race with race. Various checks 
are always in action, serving to keep down the numbers 
of each savage tribe, — such as periodical famines, 
nomadic habits and the consequent deaths of infants, 
prolonged suckling, wars, accidents, sickness, licentious- 
ness, the stealing of women, infanticide, and especially 
lessened fertility. If any one of these checks increases 
in power, even slightly, the tribe thus affected tends 
to decrease ; and when of two adjoining tribes one 
becomes less numerous and less powerful than the 
other, the contest is soon settled by war, slaughter, 
cannibalism, slavery, and absorption. Even when a 
weaker tribe is not thus abruptly swept away, if it 

‘ Transact. Internat. Con- Keview,* Oct., 1868, p. 410. 
gresB of Prehistoric Arch.’ 1868, Dr. Gerland, ‘ Ueber das 

pp. 172-175. See also Broca Aussterben der Naturvolker,’ 
(translation) in * Anthropological 1868, s. 82. 


Chap. VII. THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 288 

once begins to decrease, it generally goes on decreasing 
until it becomes extinct.®^ 

When civilised nations come into contact with bar- 
barians the struggle is short, except where a deadly 
climate gives its aid to the native race. Of the causes 
which lead to the victory of civilised nations, some are 
plain and simple, others complex and obscure. We 
can see that the cultivation of the land will be fatal in 
many ways to savages, for they cannot, or will not, 
change their habits. New diseases and vices have in 
some cases proved highly destructive ; and it appears 
that a new disease often causes much death, until those 
who are most susceptible to its destructive influence 
are gradually weeded out ; and so it may be with 
the evil efi’ects from spirituous liquors, as well as with 
the unconquerably strong taste for them shewn by so 
many savages. It further appears, mysterious as is 
the fact, that the first meeting of distinct and separated 
people generates disease.^* Mr. Sproat, who in Van- 
couver Island closely attended to the subject of extinc- 
tion, believed that changed habits of life, consequent 
on the advent of Europeans, induces much ill health. 
He lays, also, great stress on the apparently trifling 
cause that the natives become “ bewildered and dull 
“ by the new life around them ; they lose the motives 
“ for exertion, and get no new ones in their place.” 


“ Gerland (ibid. s. 12) gives 
facts in support of this state- 
ment. 

® See remarks to this effect 
in Sir H. Holland’s ‘Medical 
Notes and Reflections,’ 1839, p. 
390. 

^ I have collected (‘Journal 
of Researches, Voyage of the 


“ Beagle,” ’ p. 435) a good many 
cases bearing on this subject; 
see also Gerland, ibid. s. 8. 
Poeppig speaks of the “breath 
“ of ci-v^isation as poisonous to 
“ savages.” 

“ Sproat, ‘ Scenes and Studies 
of Savage Life,’ 1868, p. 284. 


284 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


The grade of their civilisation seems to he a most 
important element in the success of competing nations. 
A few centuries ago Europe feared the inroads of 
^Eastern barbarians; now any such fear would be 
ridiculous. It is a more curious fact, as Mr. Bagehot 
has remarked, that savages did not formerly waste 
away before the classical nations, as they now do before 
modern civilised nations ; had they done so, the old 
moralists would have mused over the event ; but there 
is no lament in any writer of that period over the 
perishing barbarians.^® The most potent of all the 
causes of extinction, appears in many cases to be 
lessened fertility and ill-health, especially amongst the 
children, arising from changed conditions of life, not- 
withstanding that the new conditions may not be in- 
jurious in themselves. I am much indebted to Mr. H. 
H. Howorth for having called my attention to this 
subject, and for having given me information respect- 
ing it. I have collected the following cases. 

When Tasmania was first colonised the natives were 
roughly estimated by some at 7000 and by others at 
20,000. Their number was soon greatly reduced, 
chiefly by fighting with the English and with each 
other. After the famous hunt by all the colonists, 
when the remaining natives delivered themselves up to 
the government, they consisted only of 120 individuals,®^ 
who were in 1832 transported to Flinders Island. 
This island, situated between Tasmania and Australia, 
is forty miles long, and from twelve to eighteen miles 

Bagehot, ‘ Physics and Poll- given are taken from ‘ The last 
tics,’ ‘ Fortnightly Review,’ of the Tasmanians,’ by J. Bon- 
Ajnil 1, 1868, p. 455. wick, 1870. 

All the statements here 


Chap. VII. 


THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 


285 


broad : it seems healthy, and the natives were well 
treated. Nevertheless, they suffered greatly in health. 
In 1834 they consisted (Bonwick, p. 250) of forty-seven 
adult males, forty-eight adult females, and sixteen 
children, or in all of 111 souls. In 1835 only one 
hundred were left. As they continued rapidly to de- 
crease, and as they themselves thought that they 
should not perish so quickly elsewhere, they were 
removed in 1847 to Oyster Cove in the southern part 
of Tasmania. They then consisted (Dec. 20th, 1847) 
of fourteen men, twenty-two women and ten children.^® 
But the change of site did no good. Disease and death 
still pursued them, and in 1864 one man (who died in 
1869), and three elderly women alone survived. The 
infertility of the women is even a more remarkable 
fact than the liability of all to ill-health and death. 
At the time when only nine women were left at Oyster 
Cove, they told Mr. Bonwick (p. 386), that only two 
had ever borne children : and these two had together 
produced only three children ! 

With respect to the cause of this extraordinary state 
of things, Dr. Story remarks that death followed the 
attempts to civilise the natives. “ If left to themselves 
“to roam as they were wont and undisturbed, they 
“ would have reared more children, and there would 
“ have been less mortality.” Another careful observer 
of the natives, Mr. Davis, remarks, “ The births have 
“ been few and the deaths numerous. This may have 
“ been in a great measure owing to their change of 
“ living and food ; but more so to their banishment 
“ from the mainland of Van Diemen’s Land, and con- 

“ This is the statement of the Governor of Tasmania, Sir W. 
Demson, * Varieties of Vice-Regal Life,* 1870, vol. i. p. 67. 


286 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


“ sequent depression of spirits ” (Bonwick, pp. 388, 
390). 

Similar facts have been observed in two widely 
different parts of Australia. The celebrated explorer, 
' Mr. Gregory, told Mr. Bonwick, that in Queensland 
“ the want of reproduction was being already felt with 
‘‘ the blacks, even in the most recently settled parts, 
‘‘ and that decay would set in.” Of thirteen aborigines 
from Shark’s Bay who visited Murchison Eiver, twelve 
died of consumption within three months.^® 

The decrease of the Maories of New Zealand has been 
carefully investigated by Mr. Fenton, in an admirable 
Keport, from which all the following statements, with 
one exception, are taken.'^® The decrease in number 
since 1830 is admitted by every one, including the 
natives themselves, and is still steadily progressing. 
Although it has hitherto been found impossible to take 
an actual census of the natives, their numbers were 
carefully estimated by residents in many districts. 
The result seems trustworthy, and shows that during 
the fourteen years, previous to 1858, the decrease was 
19*42 per cent. Some of the tribes, thus carefully 
examined, lived above a hundred miles apart, some on 
the coast, some inland ; and their means of subsistence 
and habits differed to a certain extent (p. 28). The 
total number in 1858 was believed to be 53,700, and 
in 1872, after a second interval of fourteen years, 
another census was taken, and the number is given 
as only 36,359, shewing a decrease of 32*29 per 
cent Mr. Fenton, after shewing in detail the 

For these cases, see Bon- original Inhabitants of New 
wick’s ‘ Daily Life of the Tasma- Zealand,* published by the Go- 
nians,’ 1870, p. 90 ; and the * Last vernment, 1859. 
of the Tasmanians,* 1870, p. 386. " ‘New Zealand,’ by Alex. 

‘ Observations on the Ab- Kennedy, 1873, p. 47. 


Chap. VII. 


THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 


287 


insufficiency of the various causes, usually assigned in 
explanation of this extraordinary decrease, such as 
new diseases, the profligacy of the women, drunkenness, 
wars, &c., concludes on weighty grounds that it de- 
pends chiefly on the unproductiveness of the women, 
and on the extraordinary mortality of the young 
children (pp. 31, 34). In proof of this he shews (p. 33) 
that in 1844 there was one non-adult for every 2*57 
adults ; whereas in 1858 there was only one non-adult 
for every 3*27 adults. The mortality of the adults is 
also great. He adduces as a further cause of the de- 
crease the inequality of the sexes ; for fewer females 
are born than males. To this latter point, depending 
perhaps on a widely distinct cause, I shall return in a 
future chapter. Mr. Fenton contrasts with astonish- 
ment the decrease in New Zealand with the increase in 
Ireland ; countries not very dissimilar in climate, and 
where the inhabitants now follow nearly similar habits. 
The Maories themselves (p. 35) attribute their de- 
“ cadence, in some measure, to the introduction of new 
“food and clothing, and the attendant change of 
“ habits ; ” and it will be seen, when we consider the 
influence of changed conditions on fertility, that they 
are probably right. The diminution began between 
the years 1830 and 1840 ; and Mr. Fenton shews 
(p. 40) that about 1830, the art of manufacturing 
putrid corn (maize), by long steeping in water, was 
discovered and largely practised ; and this proves that 
a change of habits was beginning amongst the natives, 
even when New Zealand was only thinly inhabited by 
Europeans. When I visited the Bay of Islands in 
1835, the dress and food of the inhabitants had already 
been much modified : they raised potatoes, maize, and 


288 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


other agricultural produce, and exchanged them for 
English manufactured goods and tobacco. 

It is evident from many statements in the life of 
Bishop Patteson,^^ that the Melanesians of the New 
' Hebrides and neighbouring archipelagoes, suffered to 
an extraordinary degree in health, and perished in 
large numbers, when they were removed to New 
Zealand, Norfolk Island, and other salubrious places, 
in order to be educated as missionaries. 

The decrease of the native population of the Sand- 
wich Islands is as notorious as that of New Zealand. 
It has been roughly estimated by those best capable of 
judging, that when Cook discovered the Islands in 
1779, the population amounted to about 300,000. 
According to a loose census in 1823, the numbers then 
were 142,050. In 1832, and at several subsequent 
periods, an accurate census was officially taken, but I 
have been able to obtain only the following returns : 


Year. 

Native Populatiok. 

(Except during 1832 
and 1836, when the 
few foreigners in the 
iblandswereincluded.) 

Annual rate of decrease 
per cent., assuming it 
to have been unilorm be- 
tween the successive cen- 
suses ; these censu>es 
being taken at irregular 
intervals. 

1832 

130,313. 

1 



( 


4*46 

1836 

108 , 579 ! 

\ 

1 




f 

2-47 

1853 

71 , 019 ! 

1 

1 



( 

1 

0-81 

1860 

67,084j 

1 



( 

\ 

2-18 

1866 

58,76s! 

1 



1 


2-17 

1872 

51,531- 

1 



‘ Life of J. 0. Patteson,’ by C. M. Younge, 1874 ; see more 
especially vol. i. p. 530. 


Chap. VII. 


THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 


289 


We here see that in the interval of forty years, 
between 1832 and 1872, the population has decreased 
no less than sixty-eight per cent. ! This has been 
attributed by most writers to the profligacy of the 
women, to former bloody wars, and to the severe 
labour imposed on conquered tribes and to newly 
introduced diseases, which have been on several 
occasions extremely destructive. No doubt these and 
other such causes have been highly eflScient, and may 
account for the extraordinary rate of decrease between 
the years 1832 and 1836 ; but the most potent of all 
the causes seems to be lessened fertility. According 
to Dr. Euschenberger of the U.S. Navy, who visited 
these islands between 1835 and 1837, in one district 
of Hawaii, only twenty-five men out of 1134, and in 
another district only ten out of 637, had a family with 
as many as three children. Of eighty married women, 
only thirty-nine had ever borne children ; and “ the 
“ official report gives an average of half a child to each 
“ married couple in the whole island.” This is almost 
exactly the same average as with the Tasmanians at 
Oyster Cove. Jarves, who published his History in 
1843, says that “ families who have three children are 
“ freed from all taxes ; those having more, are rewarded 
“ by gifts of land and other encouragements.” This 
unparalleled enactment by the government w^ell shews 
how infertile the race had become. The Eev. A. Bishop 
stated in the Hawaiian ‘ Spectator ’ in 1839, that a 
large proportion of the children die at early ages, and 
Bishop Staley informs me that this is still the case, 
just as in New Zealand. This has been attributed to 
the neglect of the children by the women, but it is 
probably in large part due to innate weakness of con- 


TJ 


290 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


stitution in the children, in relation to the lessened 
fertility of their parents. There is, moreover, a 
further resemblance to the case of New Zealand, in 
the fact that there is a large excess of male over 
female births: the census of .1872 gives 31,650 males 
to 25,247 females of all ages, that is 125*36 males for 
every 100 females ; whereas in all civilised countries 
the females exceed the males. No doubt the profligacy 
of the women may in part account for their small 
fertility ; hut their changed habits of life is a much 
more probable cause, and which will at the same time 
account for the increased mortality, especially of the 
children. The islands were visited by Cook in 1779, 
by Vancouver in 1794, and often subsequently by 
whalers. In 1819 missionaries arrived, and found that 
' idolatry bad been already abolished, and other changes 
effected by the king. After this period there was a 
rapid change in almost all the habits of life of the 
natives, and they soon became “ the most civilised of 
“ the Pacific Islanders.” One of my informants, 
Mr. Coan, who was born on the islands, remarks that 
the natives have undergone a greater change in their 
habits of life in the course of fifty years than English- 
men during a thousand years. From information 
received from Bishop Staley, it does not appear that 
the poorer classes have ever much changed their diet, 
although many new kinds of fruit have been intro- 
duced, and the sugar-cane is in universal use. Owing, 
however, to their passion for imitating Europeans, 
they altered their manner of dressing at an early 
period, and the use of alcoholic drinks became very 
general. Although these changes^ appear inconsider- 
able, I can w^ell believe, from what is known with 


Chap. VII. 


THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 


291 


respect to animals, that they might suffice to les.sen 
the fertility of the natives."*^ 

Lastly, Mr. Macnamara states that the low and 
degraded inhabitants of the Andaman Islands, on the 
eastern side of the Gulf of Bengal, are “ eminently 
“ susceptible to any change of climate : in fact, take 
“ them away from their island homes, and they are 
“ almost certain to die, and that independently of diet 
“ or extraneous influences.” He further states that 
the inhabitants of the Valley of Nepal, which is 
extremely hot in summer, and also the various hill- 
tribes of India, suffer from dysentery and fever when 
on the plains ; and they die if they attempt to pass 
the whole year there. 

We thus see that many of the wilder races of man 
are apt to suffer much in health when subjected to 
changed conditions or habits of life, and not exclusively 
from being transported to a new climate. Mere altera- 
tions in habits, which do not appear injurious • in 
themselves, seem to have this same effect ; and in 
several cases the children are particularly liable to 
suffer. It has often been said, as Mr. Macnamara 
remarks, that man can resist with impunity the 
greatest diversities of climate and other changes ; but 


The foregoing statements 
are taken chiefly from the fol- 
lowing works : ‘ Jarves’ History 
of the Hawaiian Islands,’ 1843, 
p. 400-407. Cheever, ‘Life in 
the Sandwich Islands,’ 1851, p. 
277. Ruschenberger is quoted 
by Bonwick, ‘ Last of the Tas- 
manians,’ 1870, p. 378. Bishop 
is quoted by Sir E. Belcher, 
‘ Voyage Round the World,’ 
1843, vol. i. p. 272. I owe the 


census of the several years to 
the kindness of Mr. Coan, at the 
request of Dr. Youmans of New 
York ; and in most cases 1 have 
compared the Youmans figures 
with those given in several of 
the above-named works. I have 
omitted the census for 1850, as 
I have seen two widely different 
numbers given. 

^ ‘The Indian Medical Ga- 
zette,’ Nov. 1, 1871, p. 240. 


292 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


this is true only of the civilised races. Man in his 
wild condition seems to be in this respect almost as 
susceptible as his nearest allies, the anthropoid apes, 
which have never yet survived long, when removed 
from their native cmintry. 

Lessened fertility from changed conditions, as in 
the case of the Tasmanians, Maories, Sandwich 
Islanders, and apparently the Australians, is still 
more interesting than their liability to ill-health and 
death; for even a slight degree of infertility, com- 
bined with those other causes which tend to check the 
increase of every population, would sooner or later 
lead to extinction. The diminution of fertility may 
be explained in some cases by the profligacy of the 
women (as until lately with the Tahitians), but 
Mr. Fenton has shewn that this explanation by no 
means suffices with the New Zealanders, nor does it 
with the Tasmanians. 

In the paper above quoted, Mr. Macnamara gives 
reasons for believing that the inhabitants of districts 
subject to malaria are apt to be sterile; but this 
cannot apply in several of the above cases. Some 
writers have suggested that the aborigines of islands 
have suffered in fertility and health from long con- 
tinued inter-breeding ; but in the above cases infertility 
has coincided too closely with the arrival of Europeans 
for us to admit this explanation. Nor have we at 
present any reason to believe that man is highly 
sensitive to the evil effects of inter-breeding, especially 
in areas so large as New Zealand, and the Sandwich 
archipelago with its diversified stations. On the 
contrary, it is known that the present inhabitants of 
Norfolk Island are nearly all cousins or near relations, 


Chap. VH. 


THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 


293 


as are the Todas in India, and the inhabitants of some 
of the Western Islands of Scotland ; and yet they seem 
Qot to have suffered in fertility. 

A much more probable view is suggested by the 
analogy of the lower animals. The reproductive 
system can be shewn to be susceptible to an extraor- 
dinary degree (though why we know not) to changed 
conditions of life ; and this susceptibility leads both to 
beneficial and to evil results. A large collection of 
facts on this subject is given in chap, xviii. of vol. ii. 
of my ‘ Variation of Animals and Plants under Domes- 
tication,’ I can here give only the briefest abstract ; 
and every one interested in the subject may consult 
the above work. Very slight changes increase the 
health, vigour and fertility of most or all organic 
beings, whilst other changes are known to render a 
large number of animals sterile. One of the most 
familiar cases, is that of tamed elephants not breeding 
in India ; though they often breed in Ava, where the 
females are allowed to roam about the forests to some 
extent, and are thus placed under more natural con- 
ditions. The case of various American monkeys, both 
sexes of which have been kept for many years together 
in their own countries, and yet have very rarely or 
never bred, is a more apposite instance, because of 
their relationship to man. It is remarkable how 
slight a change in the conditions often induces 
sterility in a wild animal when captured ; and this is 
the more strange as all our domesticated animals have 

On the close relationship of work, 1873, p. 110. For the 
the Norfolk Islanders, .see Sir Western Islands of Scotland, 
W. Denison, ‘ Varieties of Vice- Dr. Mitchell, ‘ Edinburgh Medi- 
licgal Tiife,’ vol. i., 1870, p. 410. cal floiirnal,’ March to June, 
For the I'odas, see Col. Marsliall’s 1865. 


294 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


become more fertile than they were in a state of 
nature; and some of them can resist the most 
unnatural conditions with undiminished fertility.***^ 
Certain groups of animals are much more liable than 
others to be affected by captivity ; and generally all 
the species of the same group are affected in the same 
manner. But sometimes a single species in a group 
is rendered sterile, whilst the others are not so; on 
the other hand, a single species may retain its fertility 
whilst most of the others fail to breed. The males 
and females of some species when confined, or when 
allowed to live almost, but not quite free, in their 
native country, never unite ; others thus circum- 
stanced frequently unite but never produce offspring ; 
others again produce some offspring, but fewer than in 
a state of nature ; and - as bearing on the above cases 
of man, it is important to remark that the young are 
apt to be weak and sickly, or malformed, and to perish 
at an early age. 

Seeing how general is this law of the susceptibility of 
the reproductive system to changed conditions of life, 
and that it holds good with our nearest allies, the 
Quadrumana, I can hardly doubt that it applies to 
man in his primeval state. Hence if savages of any 
race are induced suddenly to change their habits of 
life, they become more or less sterile, and their young 
offspring suffer in health, in the same manner and 
from the same cause, as do the elephant and hunting- 
leopard in India, many monkeys in America, and a 
host of animals of all kinds, on removal from their 
natural conditions. 

For the evideuoe on this head, see ‘ Variation of Animals,' 
&c., vol. ii. p. 111. 


Chap. VII. 


THE EXTINCTION OF RACES. 


295 


We can see why it is that aborigines, who have long 
inhabited islands, and who must have been long 
exposed to nearly uniform conditions, should be 
specially affected by any change in their habits, as 
seems to be the case. Civilised races can certainly 
resist changes of all kinds far better than savages ; 
and in this respect they resemble domesticated animals, 
for though the latter sometimes suffer in health 
(for instance European dogs in India), yet they are 
rarely rendered sterile, though a few such instances 
have been recorded.'*^ The immunity of civilised races 
and domesticated animals is probably due to their 
having been subjected to a greater extent, and there- 
fore having grown somewhat more accustomed, to 
diversified or varying conditions, than the majority of 
wild animals ; and to their having formerly im- 
migrated or been carried from country to country, and 
to different families or sub-races having inter-crossed. 
It appears that a cross with civilised races at once 
gives to an aboriginal race an immunity from the evil 
consequences of changed conditions. Thus the crossed 
offspring from the Tahitians and English, when 
settled in Pitcairn Island, increased so rapidly that 
the Island was soon overstocked; and in June 1856 
they were removed to Norfolk Island. They then 
consisted of 60 married persons and 134 children, 
making a total of 194. Here they likewise increased 
so rapidly, that although sixteen of them returned to 
Pitcairn Island in 1859, they numbered in January 
1868, 300 souls ; the males and females being in 
exactly equal numbers. What a contrast does this 
case present with that of the Tasmanians ; the 
‘ Variation of Animals,’ &c., vol. ii. p. 16. 


296 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


Norfolk Islanders increased in only twelve and a half 
years from 194 to 300 ; whereas the Tasmanians 
decreased during fifteen years from 120 to 46, of which 
latter number only ten were children.'^® 

So again in the interval between the census of 1866 
and 1872 the natives of full blood in the Sandwich 
Islands decreased by 8081, whilst the half-castes, who 
are believed to be healthier, increased by 847 ; but I 
do not know whether the latter number includes the 
offspring from the half-castes, or only the half-castes 
of the first generation. 

The cases which I have here given all relate to 
aborigines, who have been subjected to new conditions 
as the result of the immigration of civilised men. 
But sterility and ill-health would probably follow, if 
savages were compelled by any cause, such as the 
inroad of a conquering tribe, to desert their homes and 
to change their habits. It is an interesting circum- 
stance that the chief check to wild animals becoming 
domesticated, which implies the power of their breed- 
ing freely when first captured, and one chief check to 
wild men, when brought into contact with civilisation, 
surviving to form a civilised race, is the same, namely, 
sterility from changed conditions of life. 

Finally, although the gradual decrease and ultimate 
extinction of the races of man is a highly complex 
problem, depending on many causes which differ in 
different places and at different times ; it is the same 
problem as that presented by the extinction of one of 

These details are taken the House of Commons, May 
from ‘ I'he Mutineers of the 29th, 1863. The following 

“Bounty,”’ by Lady Belcher, statements about the ISandwich 
1870; and from ‘Pitcairn Is- Islanders are from the ‘ Honolulu 
land,’ ordered to be printed by Gazette,’ and from Mr. Coan, 


Chap. VII. 


THE FORMATION OF RACES. 


297 


the higher animals — of the fossil horse, for instance, 
which disappeared from South America, soon after- 
wards to be replaced, within the same districts, by 
countless troups of the Spanish horse. The New 
Zealander seems conscious of this parallelism, for he 
compares his future fate with that of the native rat 
now almost exterminated by the European rat. 
Though the difficulty is great to our imagination, and 
really great, if we wish to ascertain the precise causes 
and their manner of action, it ought not to be so 
to our reason, as long as we keep steadily in mind that 
the increase of each species and each race is constantly 
checked in various ways; so that if any new check, 
even a slight one, be superadded, the race will surely 
decrease in number ; and decreasing numbers will 
sooner or later lead to extinction ; the end, in most 
cases, being promptly determined by the inroads of 
conquering tribes. 

On the Formation of the Races of Man . — In some 
cases the crossing of distinct races iias led to the 
formation of a new race. The singular fact that the 
Europeans and Hindoos, who belong to the same 
Aryan stock, and speak a language fundamentally the 
same, diffier widely in appearance, whilst Europeans 
iliffer but little from Jews, who belong to the Semitic 
stock, and speak quite another language, has been 
accounted for by Broca,'^^ through, certain Aryan 
branches having been largely crossed by indigenous 
tribes during their wide diffusion. When two races in 
close contact cross, the first result is a heterogeneous 
mixture : thus Mr. Hunter, in describing the Santali 

‘ Ou Anthropology,’ tiimslation ‘ Anthropolog. liovicw,’ Jiui. 
18C8, p. 38. 


298 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


or hill-tribes of India, says that hundreds of impercep- 
tible gradations may he traced “ from ihe black, squat 
"‘tribes of the mountains to the tall olive-coloured 
“ Brahman, with his intellectual brow, calm eyes, and 
“ high but narrow head ; ” so that it is necessary in 
courts of justice to ask the witnesses whether they 
arc Santalis or Hindoos.®" Whether a heterogeneous 
people, such as the inhabitants of some of the Poly- 
nesian islands, formed by the crossing of two distinct 
races, with few or no pure members left, would ever 
become homogeneous, is not known from direct evi- 
dence. But as with our domesticated animals, a cross- 
breed can certainly be fixed and made uniform by 
careful selection®^ in the course of a few generations, 
we may infer that the free intercrossing of a hetero- 
geneous mixture during a long descent would supply 
the place of selection, and overcome any tendency to 
reversion ; so that the crossed race would ultimately 
become homogeneous, though it might not partake in 
an equal degree of the characters of the two parent- 
races. 

Of all the differences between the races of man, the 
colour of the skin is the most conspicuous and one 
of the best marked. It was formerly thought that 
differences of this kind could be accounted for by 
long exposure to different climates ; but Pallas first 
shewed that this is not tenable, and he has since been 
followed by almost all anthropologists.®^ This view 


‘ The Annals of Rural 
Bengal,’ 1868, p. 134. 

The Variation of Animals 
and Plants under Domestica- 
tion,’ vol. ii. p. 95. 

Pallas, ‘Act. Acad. St. 
Petersburg,’ 1780, part ii. p. 69. 


He was followed by Rudolpbi, 
in his ‘ Jieytrage zur Anthropo- 
logic,’ 1812. An excellent sum- 
mary of the evidence is given 
by Godron, ‘ De I’Esp^ce,’ 1859, 
vol. ii. p. 246, &c. 


Chap. VII. 


THE FORMATION OF RACES. 


299 


has been rejected chiefly because the distribution of 
the variously coloured races, most of whom must have 
long inhabited their present homes, does not coincide 
with corresponding differences of climate. Some little 
weight may be given to such cases as that of the 
Dutch families, who, as we hear on excellent autho- 
rity,®^ have not undergone the least change of colour 
after residing for three centuries in South Africa. 
An argument on the same side may likewise be drawn 
from the uniform appearance in various parts of the 
world of gipsies and Jews, though the uniformity of 
the latter has been somewhat exaggerated.®^ A very 
damp or a very dry atmosphere has been supposed to 
be more influential in modifying the colour of the skin 
than mere heat ; but as D’Oibigny in South America, 
and Livingstone in Africa, arrived at diametrically 
opposite conclusions with respect to dampness and 
dryness, any conclusion on this head must be con- 
sidered as very doubtful.®® 

Various facts, which I have given elsewhere, prove 
that the colour of the skin and hair is sometimes 
correlated in a surprising manner with a complete 
immunity from the action of certain vegetable poisons, 
and from the attacks of certain parasites. Hence it 
occurred to me, that negroes and other dark races might 
have acquired their dark tints by the darker individuals 
escaping from the deadly influence of the miasma 
of their native countries, during a long series of 
generations. 

“ Sir Andrew Smith, aa “ LiviDgstone’s ‘ Travels and 
quoted by Knox, ‘Races of Researches in S. Africa,’ 1857, 
Man ’ 1850, p. 473. pp. 338, 339. D’Orbigny, as 

" See l>e Quatrefages on this quoted by Godron, ‘ De I’Espece,’ 
head, ‘ Revue des Cours Scienti- vol. ii. p. 266. 
liques,’ Oct. 17, 1868, p. 731. 


300 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I, 


I afterwards found that this same idea had long ago 
occurred to Dr. Wells.®® It has long been known that 
negroes, and even mulattoes, are almost completely 
exempt from the yellow-fever, so destructive in tropical 
' America.®’ They likewise escape to a large extent the 
fatal intermittent fevers, that prevail along at least 
2600 miles of the shores of Africa, and which annually 
cause one-fifth of the white settlers to die, and another 
fifth to return home invalided.®® This immunity in the 
negro seems to be partly inherent, depending on some 
unknown peculiarity of constitution, and partly the 
result of acclimatisation. Pouchet ®® states that the 
negro regiments recruited near the Soudan, and bor- 
rowed from the Viceroy of Egypt for the Mexican war, 
escaped the yellow-fever almost equally with the 
negroes originally brought from various parts of Africa 
and accustomed to the' climate of the West Indies. 
That acclimatisation plays a part, is shewn by the 
many cases in which negroes have become somewhat 
liable to tropical fevers, after having resided for some 
time in a colder climate.®® The nature of the climate 
under which the white races have long resided, likewise 

Major Tulloch, in a paper 
read before the Statistical 
Society, April 20th, 1840, and 
given in the ‘ Athenajum,’ 1840, 
p. 353. 

“ ‘The Plurality of the 
Human Race’ (translat.), 1864, 

p. 60. 

Quatrefages, ‘Unite de 
I’Espece Humaine,’ 1861, p. 205. 
Waitz, ‘ Introduct. to Anthro- 
pology,’ translat. vol. i. 1863, p. 
124. Livingstone gives analo- 
gous cases in his ‘ 'Pravela,’ 


* See a paper read before the 
Royal Soc. in 1813, and pub- 
lished in his Essays in 1818. I 
have given an account of Dr. 
Wells’ views in the Historical 
Sketch (p. xvi.) to my ‘ Origin 
of Species.’ Various cases of 
colour correlated with constitu- 
tional peculiarities are given in 
my ‘ Variation of Animals 
under Domestication,* vol. ii. 
pp. 227, 335. 

See, for instance, Nott and 
Grliddon, ‘Tyj)es of Mankind,’ 


Chap. VII. 


THE FORMATION OF RACES. 


301 


has some influence on them ; for during the fearful 
epidemic of yellow fever in Demerara during 1837, 
Dr. Blair found that the death-rate of the immigrants 
was proportional to the latitude of the country whence 
they had come. With the negro the immunity, as fai 
as it is the result of acclimatisation, implies exposure 
during a prodigious length of time ; for the aborigines 
of tropical America who have resided there from time 
immemorial, are not exempt from yellow fever ; and 
the Kev. H. B. Tristram states, that there are districts 
in Northern Africa which the native inhabitants are 
compelled annually to leave, though the negroes can 
remain with safety. 

That the immunity of the negro is in any degree 
correlated with the colour of his skin is a mere conjec- 
ture : it may be correlated with some difference in his 
blood, nervous system, or other tissues. Nevertheless, 
from the facts above alluded to, and from some connec- 
tion apparently existing between complexion and a 
tendency to consumption, the conjecture seemed to me 
not improbable. Consequently I endeavoured, with 
but little success,®^ to ascertain how far it holds good. 


In the spring of 1862 I 
obtained permission from the 
Director-General of the Medical 
department of the Army, to 
transmit to the surgeons of the 
various regiments on foreign 
service a blank table, with the 
following appended remarks, 
but I have received no returns. 
“ As several well-marked cases 
“ have been recorded with our 
“ domestic animals of a relation 
‘ between the colour of the 
“ dermal appendages and the 
“ constitution ; and it being 


^‘notorious that there is some 
“ limited degree of relation 
“ between the colour of the 
“ races of man and the climate 
“ inhabited by them ; the fol- 
lowing investigation seems 
“ worth consideration. Namely, 
“ whether there is any relation 
“in Europeans between the 
“ colour of their hair, and their 
“ liability to the diseases of 
“ tropical countries. If the 
“surgeons of the several regi- 
“ ments, when stationed in 
“unhealthy tropical districts, 


302 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part L 


The late Dr. Daniell, who had long lived on the West 
Coast of Africa, told me that he did not believe in any 
such relation. He was himself unusjially fair, and had 
.withstood the climate in a wonderful manner. When 
he first arrived as a hoy on the coast, an old and 
experienced negro chief predicted from his appearance 
that this would prove the case. Dr. Nicholson, of 
Antigua, after having attended to this subject, writes 
to me that dark-coloured Europeans escape the yellow 
fever more than those that are light-coloured. Mr. J. 
M. Harris altogether denies that Europeans with dark 
hair withstand a hot climate better than other men : 
on the contrary, experience has taught him in making 
a selection of men for service on the coast of Africa, 
to choose those with red hair.®^ As far, therefore, as 


“ would be so good as first to 
“ count, as a standard of com- 
“ parison, how many men, in 
“the force whence the sick are 
“drawn, have dark and light- 
“ coloured hair, and hair of 
“ intermediate or doubtful tints ; 
“ and if a similar account were 
“ kept by the same medical 
“ gentlemen, of all the men who 
“ suffered from malarious and 
“ yellow fevers, or from dysen- 
“ tery, it would soon be apparent, 
“after some thousand cases had 
“ been tabulated, whether there 
“exists any relation between 
“ the colour of the hair and con- 
“ stitutional liability to tropical 
“ diseases. Perhaps no such 
“relation would be discovered, 
“ but tho investigation is well 
“ worth making. In case any 
“positive result were obtained, 
“ it might be of some practical 
“ use in selecting men for any 


“ particular service. Theoreti- 
“ cally the result would be of 
“ high interest, as indicating 
“ one means by which a race of 
“ men inhabiting from a remote 
“ period an unh^calthy tropical 
“climate, might have become 
“dark-coloured by the better 
“ preservation of dark-haiied or 
“ dark-complexioned individuals 
“ during a long succession of 
“ generations.” 

‘Anthropological lleview,’ 
Jan. 1866, p. xxi. Dr. Sharpe 
also says, with respect to India 
“ (‘Man a Special Creation,’ 1873, 
“ p. 118), that it has been 
“ noticed by some medical 
“officers that Europeans with 
“ light hair and florid com- 
“ plexions suffer less from dis- 
“ eases of tropical countries than 
“ persons with dark hair and 
“sallow complexions; and, so 
“ far as I know, there appear to 


Chap. VII. 


THE FORMATION OF RACES. 


303 


these slight indications go, there seems no foundation 
for the hypothesis, that blackness has resulted from 
the darker and darker individuals having survived 
better during long exposure to fever-generating 
miasma. 

Dr. Sharpe remarks,®^ that a tropical sun, which 
burns and blisters a ’white skin, does not injure a black 
one at all ; and, as he adds, this is not due to habit in 
the individual, for children only six or eight months 
old are often carried about naked, and are not affected. 
I have been assured by a medical man, that some years 
ago during each summer, but not during the winter, 
his hands became marked with light brown patches, 
like, although larger than freckles, and that these 
patches were never affected by sun-burning, W'hilst the 
white parts of his skin have on several occasions been 
much inflamed and blistered. With the lower animals 
there is, also, a constitutional difference in liability to 
the action of the sun between those parts of the skin 
clothed with white hair and other parts.®^ Whether 
the saving of the skin from being thus burnt is of 
sufficient importance to account for a dark tint having 
been gradually acquired by man through natural 
selection, I am unable to judge. If it be so, we should 
have to assume that the natives of tropical America 
have lived there for a much shorter time than the 


“ be good grounds for this 
“ remark.” On the other hand, 
Mr. Heddle, of Sierra Leone, 
“ who has had more clerks 
“ killed under him than any 
“ other man,” by the climate of 
the West African Coast (W. 
Reade, * African Sketch Book,’ 


vol. ii. p. 622), holds a directl\ 
opposite view, as does Capt. 
Burton. 

“ ‘Man a Special Creation.’ 
1873, p. 119. 

‘Variation of Animals and 
Plants under Domestication 
vol. ii. pp. 336, 337. 


304 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 1 


negroes in Africa, or the Papuans in the southern parts 
of the Malay archipelago, just as the lighter-coloured 
Hindoos have resided in India for a shorter time than 
the darker aborigines of the central and southern parts 
of the peninsula. 

Although with our present knowledge we cannot 
account for the differences of colour in the races of man, 
through any advantage thus gained, or from the direct 
action of climate ; yet we must not quite ignore the 
latter agency, for there is good reason to believe that 
some inherited effect is thus produced.®^ 

We have seen in the second chapter that the con- 
ditions of life affect the development of the bodily frame 
in a direct manner, and that the effects are transmitted. 
Thus, as is generally admitted, the European settlers 
in the United States undergo a slight but extraordinary 
rapid change of appearance. Their bodies and limbs 
become elongated ; and I hear from Col. Bernys that 
during the late war in the United States, good evidence 
was afforded of this fact by the ridiculous appearance 
presented by the German regiments, when dressed in 
ready-made clothes manufactured for the American 
market, and which were much too long for the men in 
every way. There is, also, a considerable body of 
evidence shewing that in the Southern States the 


See, for instance, Quatre- 
fages (‘ Revue des Cours Scienti- 
fiques,’ Oct. 10, 1868, p. 724) 
on the effects of rt'.sidence in 
Abyssinia and Arabia, and other 
analogous cases. Dr. Rolle 
(‘ Der Mensch, seine Abstam- 
mung,’ &c., 1865, s. 99) states, 
on the authority of Khanikof, 
that the greater number of 


German families settled in 
Georgia, have acquired in the 
course of two generations dark 
hair and eyes. Mr. D. Forbes 
informs me that the Quichuas 
in the Andes vary greatly in 
colour, according to the position 
of the valleys inhabited by 
them. 


Chap. VII. THE FOKMATION OF KAOES. 305 

house-slaves of the third generation present a markedly 
different appearance from the field-slaves.®® 

If, however, we look to the races of man as dis- 
tributed over the world, we must infer that their 
characteristic differences cannot he accounted for by 
the direct action of different conditions of life, even 
after exposure to them for an enormous period of time. 
The Esquimaux live exclusively on animal food ; they 
are clothed in thick fur, and are exposed to intense 
cold and to prolonged darkness ; yet they do not differ 
in any extreme degree from the inhabitants of Southern 
China, who live entirely on vegetable food, and are 
exposed almost naked to a hot, glaring climate. The 
unclothed Fuegians live on the marine productions of 
their inhospitable shores; the Botocudos of Brazil 
wander about the hot forests of the interior and live 
chiefly on vegetable productions ; yet these tribes 
resemble each other so closely that the Fuegians on 
board the “ Beagle ” were mistaken by some Brazilians 
for Botocudos. The Botocudos again, as well as the 
other inhabitants of tropical America, are wholly 
different from the Negroes who inhabit the opposite 
shores of the Atlantic, are exposed to a nearly similar 
climate, and follow nearly the same habits of life. 

Nor can the differences between the races of man be 
accounted for by the inherited effects of the increased 
or decreased use of parts, except to a quite insignificant 
degree. Men who habitually live in canoes, may have 
their legs somewhat stunted ; those who inhabit lofty 
regions may have their chests enlarged; and those 
who constantly use certain sense-organs may have the 

**■' Harlan, ‘Medical Re- 1861, p. 128) has collected 
seaiches,’ p. 532. Quatrefages much evidence on this head. 

(‘ Unite de I’Espece Humaine, 


X 


306 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part T. 


cavities in which they are lodged somewhat increased 
in size, and their features consequently a little modified. 
With civilised nations, the reduced size of the jaws 
from lessened use — the habitual play of different 
muscles serving to express different emotions — and the 
increased size of the brain from greater intellectual 
activity, have together produced a considerable effect 
on their general appearance when compared with 
savages.®’ Increased bodily stature, without any cor- 
responding increase in the size of the brain, may 
(judging from the previously adduced case of rabbits), 
have given to some races an elongated skull of the 
dolichocephalic type. 

Lastly, the little-understood principle of correlated 
development has sometimes come into action, as in 
the case of great muscular development and strongly 
projecting supra-orbital ridges. The colour of the 
skin and hair are plainly correlated, as is the texture 
of the hair with its colour in the Mandans of North 
America.®® The colour also of the skin, and the odour 
emitted by it, are likewise in some manner connected. 
With the breeds of sheep the number of hairs within 
a given space and the number of the excretory pores 
are related.®® If we may judge from the analogy of 
our domesticated animals, many modifications of 


See Prof. Schaaffhausen, 
translat. iu ‘ Anthropological 
TIeview,’ Oct. 1868, p. 429. 

Mr. Catlin states (‘N. 
American Indians,’ 3rd edit. 
1842, vol. i. p. 49) that in the 
whole tribe of the Mandans, 
about one in ten or twelve of 
the members, of all ages and 
both sexes, have bright silvery- 
grey hair, which is hereditary. 


Now this hair is as coarse and 
harsh as that of a horse’s mane, 
whilst the hair of other colours 
is 6ne and soft. 

On the odour of the skin, 
Godron, ‘Sur I’Esp^ce,’ torn. ii. 
p. 217. On the pores in the 
skin. Dr. Wilckens, ‘ Die Aufga- 
ben der Landwirth. Zootech- 
nik,’ 1869, s. 7. 


Chap. VII. THE FORMATION OF RACES. 307 

structure in man probably come under this principle 
of correlated development. 

We have now seen that the external characteristic 
differences between the races of man cannot be accounted 
for in a satisfactory manner by the direct action of the 
conditions of life, nor by the effects of the continued 
use of parts, nor through the principle of correlation 
We are therefore led to enquire whether slight indi- 
vidual differences, to which man is eminently liable, 
may not have been preserved and augmented during a 
long series of generations through natural selection. 
But here we are at once met by the objection that 
beneficial variations alone can be thus preserved ; and 
as far as we are enabled to judge, although always 
liable to err on this head, none of the differences 
between the races of man are of any direct or special 
service to him. The intellectual and moral or social 
faculties must of course be excepted from this remark. 
The great variability of all the external differences 
between the races of man, likewise indicates that they 
cannot be of much importance ; for if important, they 
would long ago have been either fixed and preserved, 
or eliminated. In this respect man resembles those 
forms, called by naturalists protean or polymorphic, 
which have remained extremely variable, owing, as it 
seems, to such variations being of an indifferent nature, 
and to their having thus escaped the action of natural 
selection. 

We have thus far been baffled in all our attempts to 
account for the differences between the races of man ; 
but there remains one important agency, namely 
{Sexual Selection, which appears to have acted power- 


308 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


fully on man, as on many other animals. I do not 
intend to assert that sexual selection will account for 
all the differences between the races. An unexplained 
residuum is left, about which we can only say, in our 
ignorance, that as individuals are continually horn 
with, for instance, heads a little rounder or narrower, 
and with noses a little longer or shorter, such slight 
differences might become fixed and uniform, if the 
unknown agencies which induced them were to act in 
a more constant manner, aided by long-continued 
intercrossin;j. Such variations come under the pro- 
visional class, alluded to in our second chapter, which 
for the want of a better term are often called spon- 
taneous. Nor do I pretend that the effects of sexual 
selection can be indicated with scientific precision ; but 
it can he shewn that it would he an inexplicable fact 
if man had not been modified by this agency, which 
appears to have acted powerfully on innumerable 
animals. It can further be shewn that the differences 
between the races of man, as in colour, hairiness, form 
of features, &c., are of a kind which might have been 
expected to come under the influence of sexual selection. 
But in order to treat this subject properly, I have 
found it necessary to pass the whole animal kingdom 
in review. I have therefore devoted to it the Second 
Part of this work. At the close I shall return to man, 
and, after attempting to shew how far he has been 
modified through sexual selection, will give a brief 
summary of the chapters in this First Part, 


Chap. VU. 


STRUCTURE OF THE BRAIN. 


309 


Note on the Resemblances and Diffekencesin the Strdctuke 

AND the Development of the Brain in Man and Apes. By 

Professor Huxley, F.Pi.S. 

'J'lie controversy respecting the nature and the extent of the differ- 
ences in the structure of the brain in man and the apes, which arose 
some fifteen years ago, has not yet come to an end, though the 
subject matter of the dispute is, at present, totally different from 
what it was formerly. It was originally asserted and re-asserted, 
with singular pertinacity, that the biain of all the apes, even the 
highest, differs from that of man, in the absence of such conspicuous 
structures as the posterior lobes of the cerebral hemispheres, with 
the posterior cornu of the lateral ventricle and the hippocampus 
minor y contained in those lobes, which are so obvious in man. 

But the truth that the three structures in question are as well 
developed in apes’ as in human brains, or even better ; and that it 
is characteristic of all the Primates (if we exclude the Lemurs) to 
have these parts well developed, stands at present on as secure a 
basis as any proposition in comparative anatomy. Moreover, it is 
admitted by every one of the long series of anatomists who, of late 
years, have paid special attention to the arrangement of the compli- 
cated sulci and gyri which appear upon the surface of the cerebral 
hemispheres in man and the higher apes, that tliey are disposed 
after tlie very same pattern in him, as in them. Every principal 
gyrus and sulcus of a chimpanzee’s brain is clearly represented in 
that of a man, so that the terminology which applies to the one 
answers for the other. On this point there is no difference of 
opinion. Some years since. Professor Bischoff published a memoir 
on the cerebral convolutions of man and apes ; and as the purpose 
of my learned colleague was certainly not to diminish the value of 
the differences between apes and men in this respect, I am glad to 
make a citation from him. 

“ That the apes, and especially the orang, chimpanzee and gorilla, 
“ come very close to man in their organisation, much nearer than 
“ to any other animal, is a well knoi\Ti fact, disputed by nobody. 
“Looking at the matter from the point of view of organisation 


‘Die Grosshirn-Windungen des Menschen ; ’ ‘ Ahhandlungen 
der K. Bayerischen Akademie,’ Bd. x., 1868. 


810 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt I. 


“ alone, no one probably would ever bave disputed the view of 
“ liinnseus, that man should be placed, merely as a peculiar species, at 
“ the head of the mammalia and of those apes. Both shew, in all 
“ their organs, so close an affinity, that the most exact anatomical 
' “ investigation is needed in order to demonstrate those differences 

which really exist. So it is with the brains. The brains of man, 
“ theorang, the chimpanzee, the gorilla, in spite of all the important 
“differences which they present, come very close to one another” 
“ (1. c. p. 101). 

There remains, then, no dispute as to the resemblance in funda- 
mental characters, between the ape’s brain and man’s ; nor any as 
to the wonderfully close similarity between the chimpanzee, 
orang and man, in even the details of the arrangement of the gyri 
and sulci of the cerebral hemispheres. Nor, turning to the differ- 
ences between the brains of the highest apes and that of man, is 
there any serious question as to the nature and extent of these 
differences. It is admitted that the man’s cerebral hemispheres 
are absolutely and relatively larger than those of the orang and 
chimpanzee ; that his frontal lobes are less excavated by the 
upward protrusion of the roof of the orbits; that his gyri and sulci 
are, as a rule, less symmetrically disposed, and present a greater 
number of secondary plications. And it is admitted that, as a rule, 
in man, the temporo-occipital or “ external perpendicular ” fissure, 
which is usually so strongly marked a feature of the ape’s brain is 
but faintly marked. But it also clear, that none of these differences 
constitutes a sharp demarcation between the man’s and the ape’s 
brain. In respect to the external perpendicular fissure of Gratiolet, 
in the human brain for instance. Professor Turner remarks 

“In some brains it appears simply as an indentation of the 
“ margin of the hemisphere, but, in others, it extends for some 
“ distance more or less transversely outwards. I saw it in the right 
“ hemisphere of a female brain pass more than two inches outwards ; 
“ and on another specimen, also the right hemisphere, it proceeded 
“ for four-tenths of an inch outwards, and then extended dowm- 
“ wards, as far as the lower margin of the outer surface of the 
“ hemisphere. The imperfect definition of this fissure in the majority 
“ of human brains, as compared with its remarkable distinctness in 
“the brain of most Quadrumana, is owing to the presence, in the 


‘ Convolutions of the Human Cerebrum To|X)graphically 
Considered,’ 186G, p. 12. 


Chap. VII. 


STRUCTURE OF THE BRAIN. 


311 


“ former, of certain superficial, well marked, secondary convolutions 
“ which bi-idge it over and connect the parietal with the occipital 
“ lobe. The closer the first of these bridging gyri lies to the longi- 
“ tudinal fissure, the shorter is the external parieto-occipital fissure.” 

(1. c. p. 12.) 

The obhteration of the external perpendicular fissure of Gratiolet, 
therefore, is not a constant character of the human brain. On the 
other hand, its fuU development is not a constant character of the 
higher ape’s brain. For, in the chimpanzee, the more or less 
extensive obliteration of the external perpendicular sulcus by 
“ bridging convolutions,” on one side or the other, has been noted 
over and over again by Prof. Rolleston, Mr. Marshall, M. Broca and 
Professor Turner. At the conclusion of a special paper on this 
subject the latter writes ; 

“The three specimens of the brain ofa chimpanzee just described, 
“prove, that the generalisation which Gratiolet has attempted to 
“ draw of the complete absence of the first connecting convolution 
“ and the concealment of the second, as essentially characteristic 
“ features in the brain of this animal, is by no means universallj! 
“ apifiicable. In only one specimen did the brain, in these par- 
“ ticulars, follow the law which Gratiolet has expressed. As 
“ regards the presence of the superior bridging convolution, I am 
“ inclined to think that it has existed in one hemisphere, at least, 
“ in a majority of the brains of this animal which have, up to this 
“ time, been figured or described. The superficial position of the 
“ second bridging convolution is evidently less frequent, and has as 
“ yet, I believe, only been seen in the brain (A) recorded in this 
“communication. The asymmetiical arrangement in the convo- 
“lutions of the two hemispheres, which previous observers have 
“ referred to in their descriptions, is also well illustrated in these 
“ specimens.” (pp. 8, 9.) 

Even were the presence of the temporo-occipital, or external per- 
pendicular, sulcus, a mark of distinction between the higher apes 
and man, the value of such a distinctive character would be ren- 
dered very doubtful by the structure of the brain in the Platyrhine 
apes. In fact, while the temporo-occipital is one of the most 
constant of sulci in the Catarhine, or Old World, apes, it is never 


Notes more especially on ceedings of the Royal Society 
the bridging convolutions in the of Edinburgh,’ 1865 -6. 

Brain of the Chimpanzee, ‘ Pro- 


312 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


very strongly developed in the New World apes; it is absent in 
the smaller Platyrhini ; rudimentary in Pithecia and more or 
less obliterated by bridging convolutions in Ateles. 

A character which is thus variable within the limits of a single 
group can have no great taxonomic value. 

It is further established, that the degree of asymmetry of the 
convolution of the two sides in the human brain is subject to much 
individual variation ; and that, in those individuals of the Bush- 
man race who have been examined, the gyri and sulci of the two 
hemispheres are considerably less complicated and more symmetri- 
cal than in the European brain, while, in some individuals of the 
chimpanzee, their complexity and asymmetry become notable. 
This is particularly the case in the brain .of a young male chim- 
panzee figured by M. Broca. (‘ L’ordre des Primates,’ p. 165, 
fig. 11.) 

Again, as respects the question of absolute size, it is established 
that the difference between the largest and the smallest healthy 
human brain is greater than the difference between the smallest 
healthy human brain and the largest chimpanzee’s or orang’s brain. 

Moreover, there is one circumstance in which the orang’s and 
chimpanzee’s brains resemble man’s, but in which they differ from 
the lower apes, and that is the presence of two corpora candicantia 
— the Oynomorpha having but one. 

In view of these facts I do not hesitate in this year 1874, to 
repeat and insist upon the proposition which I enunciated in 
1863 :'^" 

“ So far as cerebral structure goes, therefore, it is clear that man 
“ differs less from the chimpanzee or the orang, than these do even 
“ from the monkeys, and that the difference between the brain of 
“ the chimpanzee and of man is almost insignificant when com- 
“ pared with that between the chimpanzee brain and that of a 
“ Lemur.” 

In the paper to which I have referred. Professor Bischoff does not 
deny the second part of this statement, but he first makes the 
irrelevant remark that it is not wonderful if the brains of an orang 
and a Lemur are very different; and secondlj^ goes on to assert 
that, “ If we successively compare the brain of a m m with that of 


Flower ‘On the Anatomy ciety,’ 1862. 
of Pithecia MonachuSj ‘ Pro- ‘ Man’s Place in Nature,* 

ceedings of the Zoological So- p. 102. 


Chap. VII. 


STRUCTURE OF THE BRAIN 


313 


“an orang; the brain of this with that of a chimpanzee, of this 
“ with that of a gorilla, and so on of a Hylobates, Semnopithecus, 
“ GynocephaluSj Cercopithecus, Macacics, Cebus, CalUthrix^ Lemur ^ 
“ Stenops, Hayale, we shall not meet with a greater, or even as 
“great a, break in the degree of development of the convolutions, 
“ as we find between the brain of a man and that of an orang or 
“ chimpanzee.” 

To which I reply, firstly, that whether this assertion be true or 
false, it has nothing whatever to do with the proposition enunciated 
in ‘ Man’s Place in Nature,’ which refers not to the development of 
the convolutions alone, but to the structure of the v^hole brain. If 
Piofessor BischofiF had taken the trouble to refer to p. 96 of the 
work he criticises, in fact, he would have found the following 
p \ssage : “ And it is a remarkable circumstance that though, so far 
“ as our present knowledge extends, there is one true structural 
“break in the series of forms of Simian brains, this hiatus does not 
“ lie between man and the manlike apes, but between the lower and 
“the lowest Simians, or in other words, between the Old and New 
“ World apes and monkeys and the Lemurs. Every Lemur which 
“has yet been examined, in fact, has its cerebellum partially visible 
“from above; and its posterior lobe, with the contained posterior 
“cornu and hippocampus minor, more or less rudimentary. Every 
“marmoset, American monkey, Old World monkey, baboon, or 
“ manlike ape, on the contrary, has its cerebellum entirely hidden, 
“ posteriorly, by the cerebral lobes, and possesses a large posterior 
“ cornu with a well-developed hippocampus minor.” 

This statement was a strictly accurate account of what was 
known when it was made; and it does not appear to me to be more 
/han apparently weakened by the subsequent discovery of the 
relatively small development of the posterior lobes in the Siamang 
and in the Howling monkey. Notwithstanding the exceptional 
brevity of the posterior lobes in these two species, no one will 
pretend that their brains, in the slightest degree, approach those of 
the Lemurs. And if, instead of putting Hapale out of its natural 
place, as Professor Bischoff most unaccountably does, we write the 
series of animals he has chosen to mention as follows : Homo, 
Pitheensj Troglodytes, Hylohufes, Semnopithecus, Cynocephalus, 
Cercopithecus, Macacus, Cebus, Callithrix, Hapale, Lemur, Stenops, 
1 venture to reaffirm that the great break in this series lies between 
Hapale and Lemur, and that this break is considerably greater than 
that between any other two terms of that series. Professor Bischoff 


314 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part T. 


ignores the fact tliat long before he wrote, Graiiolet had suggested 
the separation of the Lemurs from the other Primates on the very 
ground of the difference in their cerebral characters; and that 
Professor Flower had made the following observations in the course 
of his description of the brain of the Javan Loris : 

“ And it is especially remarkable that, in the development of the 
“posterior lobes, there is no approximation to the Lemurine, short 
“hemisphered brain, in those monkeys which are commonly sup- 
“ posed to approach this family in other respects, viz., the lower 
“members of the Platyrhine group.” 

So ffir as the structure of the adult brain is concerned, then, the 
very considerable additions to our knowledge, which have been made 
by the researches of so many investigators, during the past ten 
years, fully justify the statement which I made in 1863. But it has 
been said, that, admitting the similarity between the adult brains of 
man and apes, they are nevertheless, in reality,* widel}^ different, 
because they exhibit fundamental differences in the mode of their 
development. No one would be more ready than I to admit the 
force of this argument, if such fundamental differences of develop- 
ment really exist. But I deny that they do exist. On the contrary, 
there is a fundamental agreement in the development of the brain in 
men and apes. 

Gratiolet originated the statement that there is a fundamental 
difference in the development of the brains of apes and that of man 
— consisting in this ; that, in the apes, the sulci which first make 
their appearance are situated on the posterior region of the cerebral 
hemispheres, while, in the human foetus, the sulci first become 
visible on the frontal lobes.'^® 

This general statement is based upon two observations, the one of 
a Gibbon almost ready to be born, in which the posterior gyii were 
“ well developed,” while those of the frontal lobes were “ hardly 


‘ Transactions of the Zoolog- 
ical Society,’ vol. v. 1862. 

“ Chez tons les singes, les 
“plis posterieurs se ddveloppent 
“les premiers; les plis ante rieurs 
“ se developpent plus tard, aussi 
“la vertebre occipitale et la jiarie- 
“ talesont-elles relativementtrfe^- 
“ grandes chez le foetus. L’Hom- 
“ me presente une exception re- 
“ marquable quant k I’dpoque de 


“Taparition des plis frontaux, 
“ qui sont les premiers indiques ; 
“ mais le developpement general 
“ du lobe frontal, envisage seule- 
“ ment ])ar rapport a son volume, 
“suit les memes lois que dans 
“les singes:” Gratiolet, ‘ I\Ie- 
moire sur les plis cer^bers,’ de 
THomme et des Primataux i). 
39, Tab. iv. fig. 3. 


OlIAP. VII. 


STRUCTURK OF THE BRAIN. 


315 


“indicated (I. c. p. dy), and the other ot a human Fetus at the 
22nd or 23rd week of uterogestation, in which Gratiolet notes that 
the insula was uncovered, but that nevertheless “des incisures 
“ sement de lobe anterieur, une scissure peu profonde indique la 
“ separation du lobe occipital, tres-reduit,d’ailleurs des cette epoque. 
“ Le reste de la surface cdrebrale est encore absolument lisse.” 

Three views of this brain are given in Plate II. figs. 1, 2, 3, of 
the work cited, shewing the upper, lateral and inferior views of the 
hemispheres, but not the inner view. It is worthy of note tluit the 
figure by no means bears out Gratiolet’s description, inasmuch as 
the fissure (antero-temporal) on the posterior half of the face of the 
hemisphere is more marked than any of those vaguely indicated in 
the anterior half. If the figure is correct, it in no way justifies 
Gratiolet’s conclusion : “ II y a done entre ces cerveaux [those Of a 
“ Callithrix and of a Gibbon] et celui du foetus humain une difference 
“ fondamental. Chez cdui-ci, longtemps avant que les plis tempo- 
“ raux apparaissent, les plis frentaux essayent d’exister.” 

Since Gratiolet’s time, however, the development of the gyri and 
sulci of the brain has been made the subject of renewed investigation 
by Schmidt, Bischoff, Pansch,'^® and more particularly by Ecker,'^® 


Giatiolet’s woids arc (1. c. 
]). 39) : “ Dans le foetus dont il 
“s’agit les plis cerebraux pos- 
“t^riem-s sont bien developj)ds, 
“tandis que les i>lis du lobe 
“ frontal sont h peine indiques.” 
The figure, however (PI. iv. fig. 
3), shews the fissure of Rolando, 
and one of the frontal sulci, 
plainly enough. Nevertheless, 
M. Alix, in his ‘ Notice sur les 
travaux anthropologiques de 
Gratiolet’ (Mem. de la Society 
d’Anthropologie de Paris,’ 1868, 
pa.e 32), writes thus: “ Gratio- 
“ let a eu entre les mains le 
“ cerveau d’un foetus de Gibbon, 
“ singe eminemment superieur, 
“et tellement rapproch^ de 
“I’orang, qtie d('S naturalistes 
“ tres-competents Pont range 
“ parmi les anthropoi'des. M. 
“ Huxley, par exemple, n’h^site 
“pas «ur ce point. Eh bien. 


“ e’est sur le cerveau d’un foetus 
“ de Gibbon que Gratiolet a vu 
“ les circonvolutions du lobe 
'' temporo-sphenoidal dejd deve- 
“ loppks loTsquil n' existent pas 
encore de plis sur le lobe 
^'frontal. II dait done bien 
“ autoris^ a dire que, chez 

“ I’homme les circonvolutions 
“apparaissent d’a en to, tandis 
“que chez les singes elles se 
“ ddveloppent d’w en a.” 

* Ueber die typische Anord- 
nung der Furchen und Wind- 
ungen auf den Grosshirn-Hemi- 
spharen des Menschen und der 
Affen.’ ‘Arclnv fur Antbro- 
pologie,’ iii., 1868. 

‘Zur Entwickelungs Ge- 
schichte der Furchen und Wind- 
ungen der Grosshim-Hemispha- 
ren im Foetus des Menschen.' 
‘Archiv fiir Anthropologic,’ iii., 
1868. 


816 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Taut I. 


whose work is not only the latest, but by far the most complete, 
memoir on the subject. 

The final results of’ their inquiries may be summed uj) as 
follows . — 

1. In the human foetus, the sylvian fissure is formed in the course 
of the third month of utei ogestation. In this, and in the fourth 
month, the cerebral hemispheres are smooth and rounded (with the 
exception of the sylvian depression), and they project backwards far 
beyond the cerebellum. 

2. The sulci, properly so called, begin to appear in the interval 
between the end of the fourth and the beginning of the sixth month 
of foetal life, but Ecker is careful to point out that, not only the 
time, but the order, of their appearance is subject to considerable 
individual variation. In no case, however, are either the frontal or 
the temporal sulci the earliest. 

The first which appears, in fact, lies on the inner face of the hemi- 
sphere (whence doubtless Gratiolet, who does not seem to have ex- 
amined that face in his foetus, overlooked it), and is either the 
internal perpendicular (occipito-parietal), or the calcarine sulcus, 
these two being close together and eventually running into one 
another. As a rule the occipito-parietal is the earlier of the two. 

3. At the latter part of this period, another sulcus, the “ posterio- 
parietal,” or “ Fissure of Kolando is developed, and it is followed, in 
the course of the sixth month, by the other principal sulci of the 
frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital lobes. There is, bowevei-, 
no clear evidence that one of these constantly ajipears before the 
other; and it is remarkable that, in the brain at the period described 
and figured by Ecker (1. c. p. 212-13, Taf. II. figs. 1, 2, 3, 4), the 
antero-temporal sulcus (scissure par allele) so characteristic of the 
ape’s brain, is as well, if not better developed than the fissure of 
Rolando, and is much more marked than the proper frontal sulci. 

Taking the facts as they now stand, it appears to me that the 
order of the appearance of the sulci and gyri in the foetal human 
brain is in perfect harmony with the general doctrine of evolution, 
and with the view that man has been evolved from some ape-like 
form ; though there can be no doubt that that form was, in many 
respects, different from any member of the Primates now living. 

Von Baer taught us, half a century ago, that, in the course of 
their development, allied animals put on at first, the characters of 
the greater groups to which they belong, and, by degi-ees, assume 
those which restrict them within the limits of their family, genus. 


Chap. VII. 


STRUCTURE OF THE BRAIN. 


317 


and species ; and he proved, at the same time, that no develop- 
mental stage of a higher animal is precisely similar to the adult 
condition of any lower animal. It is quite correct to say that a 
frog passes through the condition of a fish, inasmuch as at one 
period of its life the tadpole has all the characters of a fish, and if 
it went no further, would have to he grouped among fishes. But it 
is equally true tliat a tadpole is very different from any known fish. 

In like manner, the brain of a human foetus, at the fifth month, 
may correctly be said to be, not only the brain of an ape, but that 
of an Arctopithecine or marmoset-like ape; for its hemispheres, 
with their great posterior lobster, and with no sulci but the sylvian 
and the calcarine, present the characteristics found only in the group 
of the Arctopithecine Primates. But it is equally true, as Gratiolet 
remarks, that, in its widely open sylvian fissure, it differs from the 
brain of any actual marmoset. No doubt it would be much more 
similar to the brain of an advanced foetus of a marmoset. But w e 
know nothing whatever of the development of the brain in the 
mannosets. In the Platyrhini proper, the only observation with 
which I am acquainted is due to Pansch, who found in the brain of 
a foetal Cehus Amelia, in addition to the sylvian fissure and the deep 
calcarine fissure, only a very shallow antero-temporal fissure (scissure 
parallele of Gratiolet). 

Now this fact, taken together with the circumstance that the 
antero-temporal sulcus is present in such Platyrhini as the Saimiri, 
which present mere traces of sulci on the anterior half of the ex- 
terior of the cerebral hemispheres, or none at all, undoubtedly, so far 
as it goes, affords fair evidence in favour of Gratiolet’s hypothesis, 
tliat the posterior sulci appear before the anterior, in the brains of 
the Platyrhini. But, it by no moans follows, that the rule which 
may hold good for the Platyrhini extends to the Catarhini. We 
have no information whatever resjiecting the development of the 
brain in the Cynomorpha; and, as regards the Anthropomorpha, 
nothing but the account of the biain of the Gibbon, near birth, 
already referred to. At the present moment there is not a shadow 
of evidence to shew that the sulci of a chimpanzee’s, or orang’s, 
brain do not appear in the same order as a man’s. 

Gratiolet opens his preface with the aphorism : “11 est dangeieux 
“ dans les sciences de conclure trop vite.” T fear he must have for- 
gotten this sound maxim by the time he had reached the discussion 
of the differences between men and apes, in the body of his work. 
No doubt, the excellent author of one of the most remarkable 


318 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part I. 


contributions to the just understanding of the mammalian brain 
which has ever been made, would have been the first to admit the 
insufficiency of his data had he lived to profit by the advance of 
inquiry. The misfortune is that his conclusions have been em- 
ployed by persons incompetent to appreciate their foundation, as 
arguments iq favour of obscurantism.*® 

But it is important to remark that, whether Gratiolet was right 
or wrong in his hypothesis respecting the relative order of ap- 
pearance of the temporal and frontal sulci, the fact remains ; that, 
before either temporal or frontal sulci, appear, the foetal brain of 
man presents characters which are found onh' in the lowest group 
of the Primates (leaving out the Lemurs) ; and that this is exactly 
what we should expect to be the case, if man has resulted from the 
gradual modification of the same form as that from which the other 
Primates have sprung. 

For example, M. I’Abb^ * Le Darwinisme et I’origine de 
Lecomtein his terrible pamphlet I’Homme,’ 1873. 


Ohaf. YllL 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


319 


Part II. 

SEXUAL SELECTION. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

PiiiNCiPLES OF Sexual Selection. 

Secondary sexual characters — Sexual selection — Manner of action — 
Excess of males — Polygamy — The male alone generally modified 
through sexual selection — Eagerness of the male — Variability of 
the male — Choice exerted by the female — Sexual compared with 
natural selection — Inheritance, at corresponding periods of life, at 
corresjX)nding seasons of the year, and as limited by sex — Rela- 
tions between the several forms of inheritance — Causes why one 
sex and the young are not modified through sexual selection — ■ 
Supplement on the pro|)ortional numbers of the two sexes 
throughout the animal kingdom — The proportion of the sexes in 
relation to natural selection. 

With animals wPich have their sexes separated, the 
males necessarily differ from the females in their 
organs of reproduction ; and these are the primary 
sexual characters. But the sexes often differ in what 
Hunter has called secondary sexual characters, which 
are not directly connected with the act of reproduc- 
tion ; for instance, the male possesses certain organs of 
sense or locomotion, of which the female is quite 
destitute, or has them more highly-developed, in order 
that he may readily find or reach her ; or again the 


320 


THE DESCENT OF IMAN. 


Part II. 


male lias special organs of prehension for holding 
her securely. These latter organs, of infinitely diver- 
sified kinds, graduate into those which are commonly 
ranked as primary, and in some cases can hardly he 
distinguished from them ; we see instances of this in the 
complex appendages at the apex of the abdomen in 
male insects. Unless indeed we confine the term 
“ primary ” to the reproductive glands, it is scarcely 
possible to decide which ought to be called primary 
and which secondary. 

The female often differs from the male in having 
organs for the nourishment or protection of her young, 
such as the mammary glands of mammals, and the 
abdominal sacks of the marsupials. In some few cases 
also the male possesses similar organs, which are 
wanting in the female, such as the receptacles for the 
ova in certain male fishes, and those temporarily deve- 
loped in certain male frogs. The females of most bees 
are provided with a special apparatus for collecting and 
carrying pollen, and their ovipositor is modified into a 
sting for the defence of the larvae and the community. 
Many similar cases could be given, but they do not 
here concern us. There are, however, other sexual 
differences quite unconnected with the primary repro- 
ductive organs, and it is with these that we are more 
especially concerned — such as the greater size, strength, 
and pugnacity of the male, his weapons of offence or 
means of defence against rivals, his gaudy colouring 
and various ornaments, his power of song, and other 
such characters. 

Besides the primary and secondary sexual differences, 
such as the foregoing, the males and females of some 
animals differ in structures related to different habits 


CiiAr. Till. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


321 


01 life, and not at all, or only indirectly, to the repro- 
ductive functions. Thus the females of certain flies 
(Culicidae and Tabanidae) are blood-suckers, whilst the 
males, living on flowers, have mouths destitute of 
mandibles.^ The males of certain moths and of some 
crustaceans (e,g. Tanais) have imperfect, closed mouths, 
and cannot feed. The complemental males of certain 
Cirripedes live like epiphytic plants either on the 
female or the hermaphrodite form, and are destitute 
of a mouth and of prehensile limbs. In these cases it 
is the male which has been modified, and has lost 
certain important organs, which the females possess. 
In other cases it is the female which has lost such 
parts ; for instance, the female glow-worm is destitute 
of wings, as also are many female moths, some of 
which never leave their cocoons. Many female 
parasitic crustaceans have lost their natatory legs. In' 
some weevil-beetles (Curculionidae) there is a great 
difi’erence between the male and female in the length 
of the rostrum or snout ; ^ hut the meaning of this and 
of many analogous differences, is not at all understood. 
Differences of structure between the two sexes in 
relation to different habits of life are generally con- 
fined to the lower animals ; but with some few birds 
the beak of the male differs from that of the female. In 
the Huia of New Zealand tne difference is wonderfully 
great, and we hear from Dr. Duller^ that the male 
uses his strong beak in chiselling the larvae of insects 
out of decayed wood, whilst the female probes the 

^ Westwood, ‘ Modern Class. ^ Kirby and Spence, ‘ Intro- 
of Insects,* vol. ii. 1840, p. 541. duction to Entomology,’ vol. iii. 
For the statement about Tanais, 1826, p. 309. 
mentioned below, I am indebted * ‘ Birds of New Zealand, 
to Fritz Muller. 1872, p. 66. 


Y 


322 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


softer parts with her far longer, much curved and 
pliant beak : and thus they mutually aid each other. 
In most cases, differences of structure between the 
sexes are more or less directly connected with the 
propagation of the species: thus a female, which 
has to nourish a multitude of ova, requires more 
food than the male, and consequently requires special 
means for procuring it. A male animal, which lives 
for a very short time, might lose its organs for pro- 
curing food through disuse, without detriment ; hut he 
would retain his locomotive organs in a perfect state, 
so that he might reach the female. The female, on the 
other hand, might safely lose her organs for flying, 
swimming, or walking, if she gradually acquired habits 
which rendered such powers useless. 

We are, however, here concerned only with sexual 
selection. This depends on the advantage which 
certain individuals have over others of the same sex 
and species solely in respect of reproduction. When, 
as in the cases above mentioned, the two sexes differ in 
structure in relation to different habits of life, they 
have no doubt been modified through natural selection, 
and by inheritance limited to one and the same sex. 
So again the primary sexual organs, and those for 
nourishing or protecting the young, come under the 
same influence ; for those individuals which generated 
or nourished their offspring best, would leave, cseteris 
'paribus, the greatest number to inherit their superi- 
ority; whilst those which generated or nourished 
their offspring badly, would leave but few to inherit 
their weaker powers. As the male has to find the 
female, he requires organs of sense and locomotion, 
but if these organs are necessary for the other 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


323 


purposes of life, as is generally the case, they will 
have been developed through natural selection. When 
the male has found the female, he sometimes absolutely 
requires prehensile organs to hold her; thus Dr. 
Wallace informs me that the males of certain moths 
cannot unite with the females if their tarsi or feet are 
broken. The males of many oceanic crustaceans, when 
adult, have their legs and antennae modified in an ex- 
traordinary manner for the prehension of the female ; 
hence we may suspect that it is because these animals 
are washed about by the waves of the open sea, that 
they require these organs in order to propagate their 
kind, and if so, their development has been the result of 
ordinary or natural selection. Some animals extremely 
low in the scale have been modified for this same 
purpose; thus the males of certain parasitic worms, when 
fully grown, have the lower surface of the terminal part 
of their bodies roughened like a rasp, and with this they 
coil round and permanently hold the females.^ 

When the two sexes follow exactly the same habits 
of life, and the male has the sensory or locomotive 
organs more highly developed than those of the female, 
it may be that the perfection of these is indispensable 


* M. Perrier advances this 
case (* Kevue Scientifique,’ Feb. 
1, 1873, p. 865) as one fatal to 
the beUef in sexual selection, 
inasmuch as he supposes that I 
attribute all the differences 
between the sexes to sexual 
selection. This distinguished 
naturalist, therefore, like so 
many other Frenchmen, has not 
taken the trouble, to understand 
even the first principles of sexual 
selection. An English naturalist 


insists that the claspers of 
certain male animals could not 
have been developed through 
the choice of the female ! Had 
I not met with this remark, I 
should not have thought it 
possible for any one to have 
read this chapter and to have 
imagined that I maintain that 
the choice of the female had 
anything to do with the deve- 
lopment of the prehensile organ? 
in the male. 


324 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


to the male for finding the female ; but in the vast 
majority of cases, they serve only to give one male an 
advantage over nnother, for with sufficient time, the 
Jess well-endowed males would succeed in pairing with 
the females ; and judging from the structure of the 
female, they would he in all other respects equally 
well adapted for their ordinary habits of life. Since 
in such cases the males have acquired their present 
structure, not from being better fitted to survive in the 
struggle for existence, but from having gained an 
advantage over other males, and from having trans- 
mitted this advantage to their male offspring alone, 
sexual selection must here have come into action. It 
was the importance of this distinction which led me to 
designate this form of selection , as Sexual Selection. 
So again, if the chief service rendered to the male by 
his prehensile organs is to prevent the escape of the 
female before the arrival of other males, or when 
assaulted by them, these organs will have been perfected 
through sexual selection, that is by the advantage 
acquired by certain individuals over their rivals. But 
in most cases of this kind it is impossible to distinguish 
between the effects of natural and sexual selection. 
Whole chapters could be filled with details on the differ- 
ences between the sexes in their sensory, locomotive, 
and prehensile organs. As, however, these structures 
are not more interesting than others adapted for the 
ordinary purposes of life I shall pass them over almost 
entirely, giving only a few instances under each class. 

There are many other structures and instincts which 
must have been developed through sexual selection — 
such as the weapons of offence and the means of defence 
of the males for fighting with and drivvug away their 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


325 


rivals — their courage and pugnacity — their various 
ornaments — their contrivances for producing vocal or 
instrumental music — and their glands for emitting 
odours, most of these latter structures serving only to 
allure or excite the female. It is clear that these cha- 
racters are the result of sexual and not of ordinary se- 
lection, since unarmed, unornamented, or unattractive 
males would succeed equally well in the battle for life 
and in leaving a numerous progeny, but for the presence 
of better endowed males. We may infer that this would 
be the case, because the females, which are unarmed and 
unornamented, are able to survive and procreate their 
kind. Secondary sexual characters of the kind just 
referred to, will be fully discussed in the following 
chapters, as being in many respects interesting, but 
especially as depending on the will, choice, and rivalry 
of the individuals of either sex. When we behold two 
males fighting for the possession of the female, or 
several male birds displaying their gorgeous plumage, 
and performing strange antics before an assembled 
body of females, we cannot doubt that, though led by in- 
stinct, they know what they are about, and consciously 
exert their mental and bodily powers. 

Just as man can improve the breed of his game-cocks 
by the selection of those birds which are victorious in 
the cockpit, so it appears that the strongest and most 
vigorous males, or those provided with the best 
weapons, have prevailed under nature, and have led to 
the improvement of the natural breed or species. A 
slight degree of variability leading to some advantage, 
however slight, in reiterated deadly contests would 
suffice for the work of sexual selection; and it is 
certain that secondary sexual characters are eminently 


326 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


variable. Just as man can give beauty, according to 
his standard of taste, to his male poultry, or more 
strictly can modify the beauty originally acquired by 
the parent species, can give to the Sebright bantam a 
new and elegant plumage, an erect and peculiar 
carriage — so it appears that female birds in a state of 
nature, have by a long selection of the more attractive 
males, added to their beauty or other attractive quali- 
ties. No doubt this implies powers of discrimination 
and taste on the part of the female which will at first 
appear extremely improbable ; but by the facts to be 
adduced hereafter, I hope to be able to shew that the 
females actually have these powers. When, however, 
it is said that the lower animals have a sense of beauty, 
it must not be supposed that such sense is comparable 
with that of a cultivated man, with his multiform and 
complex associated ideas. A more just comparison would 
be between the taste for the beautiful in animals, and 
that in the lowest savages, who admire and deck them- 
selves with any brilliant, glittering, or curious object. 

From our ignorance on several points, the precise 
manner in which sexual selection acts is somewhat 
uncertain. Nevertheless if those naturalists who 
already believe in the mutability of species, will read 
the following chapters, they will, I think, agree with 
me, that sexual selection has played an important part 
in the history of the organic world. It is certain that 
amongst almost all animals there is a struggle between 
the males for the possession of the female. This fact 
is so notorious that it would be superfluous to give 
instances. Hence the females have the opportunity of 
selecting one out of several males, on the supposition 
that their mental capacity suffices for the exertion of a 


ohap. vm. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


327 


choice. In many cases special circumstances tend to 
make the struggle between the males particularly severe. 
Thus the males of our migratory birds generally arrive 
at their places of breeding before the females, so that 
many males are ready to contend for each female. I 
am informed by Mr. Jenner Weir, that the bird-catchers 
assert that this is invariably the case with the night- 
ingale and blackcap, and with respect to the latter he 
can himself confirm the statement. 


Mr. Swaysland of Brighton has been in the habit, 
during the last forty years, of catching our mi- 
gratory birds on their first arrival, and he has never 
known the females of any species to arrive before their 
males. During one spring he shot thirty-nine males 
of Kay’s wagtail {Budytes Ban) before he saw a single 
female. Mr. Gould has ascertained by the dissection 
of those snipes which arrive the first in this country, 
that the males come before the females. -And the like 


holds good with most of the migratory birds of the 
United States.® The majority of the male salmon in 
our rivers, on coming up from the sea, are ready to 
breed before the females. So it appears to be with 
frogs and toads. Throughout the great class of insects 
the males almost always are the first to emerge from 
the pupal state, so that they generally abound for a 
time before any females can be seen.® The cause of 


® J. A. Allen, on the 
‘ Mammals and Winter Birds of 
Florida,’ Bull. Comp. Zoology, 
Harvard College, p. 268. 

® Even with those plants in 
which the sexes are separate, the 
male flowers are generally 
mature before the female. As 
first shewn by C. K. Sprengel, 
many hermaphrodite plants are 


dichogamous ; that is, their 
male and female organs are not 
ready at the same time, so that 
they cannot be self-fertilised. 
Now in such flowers, the pollen 
is in general matured before the 
stigma, though there are excep- 
tional cases in which the female 
organs are beforehand. 


328 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


this difference between the males and females in their 
periods of arrival and maturity is sufficiently obvious. 
Those males which annually first migrated into any 
country, or which in the spring were first ready to 
breed, or were the most eager, would leave the largest 
number of offspring ; and these would tend to inherit 
similar instincts and constitutions. It must be borne in 
mind that it would have been impossible to change 
very materially the time of sexual maturity in the 
females, without at the same time interfering with the 
period of the production of the young — a period which 
must be determined by the seasons of the year. On 
the whole there can be no doubt that with almost all 
animals, in which the sexes are separate, there is a 
constantly recurrent struggle between the males for 
the possession of the females. 

Our difficulty in regard to sexual selection lies in 
understanding how it is that the males which conquer 
other males, or those which prove the most attractive 
to the females, leave a greater number of offspring to 
inherit their superiority than their beaten and less 
attractive rivals. Unless this result does follow, the 
characters which give to certain males an advantage 
over others, could not be perfected and augmented 
through sexual selection. When the sexes exist in 
exactly equal numbers, the worst-endowed males will 
(except where polygamy prevails), ultimately find 
females, and leave as many offspring, as well fitted for 
their general habits of life, as the best-endowed males. 
From various facts and considerations, I formerly 
inferred that with most animals, in which secondary 
sexual characters are well developed, the males con- 
siderably exceeded the females in number ; but this is 


Chap VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


329 


not by any means always true. If the males were to 
the females as two to one, or as three to two, or even 
in a somewhat lower ratio, the whole affair would be 
simple ; for the better-armed or more attractive males 
would leave the largest number of offspring. But 
after investigating, as far as possible, the numerical 
proportion of the sexes, I do not believe that any great 
inequality in number commonly exists. In most cases 
sexual selection appears to have been effective in the 
following manner. 

Let us take any species, a bird for instance, and 
divide the females inhabiting a district into two equal 
bodies, the one consisting of the more vigorous and 
better-nourished individuals, and the other of the less 
vigorous and healthy. The former, there can be little 
doubt, would be ready to breed in the spring before the 
others; and this is the opinion of Mr. Jenner Weir, 
who has carefully attended to the habits of birds 
during many years. There can also be no doubt 
that the most vigorous, best-nourished and earliest 
breeders would on an average succeed in rearing the 
largest number of fine offspring.^ The males, as we 
have seen, are generally ready to breed before the 
females ; the strongest, and with some species the best 
armed of the males, drive away the weaker ; and the 
former would then unite with the more vigorous and 
better-nourished females, because they are the first 


■^Here is excellent evidence 
on the character of the offspring 
from an experienced ornitholo- 
gist. Mr. J. A. Allen, in speak- 
ing (‘ Mammals and Winter 
Birds of E. Florida,’ p. 229) of 
the later broods, after the acci- 
dental destruction of the first, 
says, that these “ are found to 


“be smaller and paler-coloured 
“ than those hatched earlier in 
“ the season. In cases where 
“ several broods are reared each 
“ year, as a general rule the 
“ birds of the earlier broods seem 
“ in all respects the most perfect 
“ and vigorous.” 


330 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


to breed.® Such vigorous pairs would surely rear a 
larger number of offspring than the retarded females, 
which would be compelled to unite with the conquered 
and less powerful males, supposing the sexes to be 
numerically equal ; and this is all that is wanted to 
add, in the course of successive generations, to the 
size, strength and courage of the males, or to improve 
their weapons. 

But in very many, cases the males which conquer 
their rivals, do not obtain possession of the females, 
independently of the choice of the latter. The court- 
ship of animals is by no means so simple and short an 
affair as might be thought. The females are most 
excited by, or prefer pairing with, the more orna- 
mented males, or those which are the best songsters, 
or play the best antics ; but it is obviously probable 
that they would at the same time prefer the more 
vigorous and lively males, and this has in some cases 
been confirmed by actual observation.® Thus the more 
vigorous females, which are the first to breed, will 
have the choice of many males ; and though they may 
not always select the strongest or best armed, they . 
will select those which are vigorous and well armed, 
and in other respects the most attractive. Both sexes, 
therefore, of such early pairs would as above explained, 
have an advantage over others in rearing offspring ; 


® Hermann Miiller has come 
to this same conclusion with 
respect to those female bees 
which are the first to emerge 
from the pupa each year. See 
his remarkable essay, ‘ An wen- 
dung den Darwin'schen Lehre 
auf Bienen,’ ‘ Verb. d. Y. Jahrg.’ 
xxix. p, 45. 


® With respect to poultry, I 
have received information, here- 
after to be given, to this effect. 
Even with birds, such as pigeons, 
which pair for life, the female, as 
I hear from Mr. Jenner Weir, 
will desert her mate if he is 
injured or grows weak. 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


331 


and this apparently has sufficed during a long course 
of generations to add not only to the strength and 
fighting powers of the males, but likewise to their 
various ornaments or other attractions. 

In the converse and much rarer case of the males 
selecting particular females, it is plain that those 
which were the most vigorous and had conquered 
others, would have the freest choice ; and it is almost 
certain that they would select vigorous as well as 
attractive females. Such pairs would have an advan- 
tage in rearing offspring, more especially if the male 
had the power to defend the female during the pairing- 
season as occurs with some of the higher animals, or 
aided her in providing for the young. The same 
principles would apply if each sex preferred and 
selected certain individuals of the opposite sex ; sup- 
posing that they selected not only the more attractive, 
but likewise the more vigorous individuals. 

Numerical Proportion of the Two Sexes . — I have 
remarked that sexual selection would be a simple affair 
if the males were considerably more numerous than 
the females. Hence I was led to investigate, as far as 
I could, the proportions between the two sexes of as 
many animals as possible ; but the materials are scanty. 
I will here give only a brief abstract of the results, 
retaining the details for a supplementary discussion, 
so as not to interfere with the course of my argument. 
Domesticated animals alone afford the means of 
ascertaining the proportional numbers at birth; but 
no records have been specially kept for this purpose. 
By indirect means, however, I have collected a con- 
siderable body of statistics, from which it appears that 


332 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


with most of our domestic animals the sexes are nearly 
equal at birth. Thus 25,560 births of race-horses 
have been recorded during twenty-one years, and the 
male births were to the female births as 99*7 to 100. 
In greyhounds the inequality is greater than with any 
other animal, for out of 6878 births during twelve 
years, the male births were to the female as HOT to 
1 00. It is, however, in some degree doubtful whether 
it is safe to infer that the proportion would be the 
same under natural conditions as under domestication ; 
for slight and unknown differences in the conditions 
affect the proportion of the sexes. Thus with man- 
kind, the male births in England are as 104*5, in 
Eussia as 108*9, and with the Jews of Livonia as 120, 
to lUO female births. But I shall recur to this curious 
point of the excess of male births in the supplement to 
this chapter. At the Cape of Good Hope, however, 
male children of European extraction have been born 
during several years in the proportion of between 90 
and 99 to 100 female children. 

For our present purpose we are concerned with the 
proportion of the sexes, not only at birth, but also at 
maturity, and this adds another element of doubt ; for 
it is a well-ascertained fact that with man the number 
of males dying before or during birth, and during the 
first few years of infancy, is considerably larger than 
that of females. So it almost certainly is with male 
lambs, and probably with some other animals. The 
males of some species kill one another by fighting ; or 
they drive one another about until they become greatly 
emaciated. They must also be often exposed to various 
dangers, whilst wandering about in eager search for 
the females. In many kinds of fish the males are much 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


383 


smaller than the females, and they are believed often 
to be devoured by the latter, or by other fishes. The 
females of some birds appear to die earlier than the 
males ; they are also liable to be destroyed on their 
nests, or whilst in charge of their young. With 
insects the female larvae are often larger than those of 
the males, and would consequently be more likely to 
be devoured. In some cases the mature females are 
less active and less rapid in their movements than the 
males, and could not escape so well from danger. 
Hence, with animals in a state of nature, we must rely 
on mere estimation, in order to judge of the propor- 
tions of the sexes at maturity ; and this is but little 
trustworthy, except when the inequality is strongly 
marked. Nevertheless, as far as a judgment can be 
formed, we may conclude from the facts given in the 
supplement, that the males of some few mammals, of 
many birds, of some fish and insects, are considerably 
more numerous than the females. 

The proportion between the sexes fluctuates slightly 
during successive years : thus with race-horses, for 
every 100 mares born the stallions varied from 107*1 
in one year to 92*6 in another year, and with grey- 
hounds from 116'3 to 95*3. But had larger numbers 
been tabulated throughout an area more extensive than 
England, these fluctuations would probably have dis- 
appeared; and such as they are, would hardly suffice 
to lead to effective sexual selection in a state of nature. 
Nevertheless, in the cases of some few wild animals, as 
shewn in the supplement, the proportions seem to 
fluctuate either during different seasons or in different 
localities in a sufficient degree to lead to such selection. 
For it should be observed that any advantage, gained 


334 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part H 


during certain years or in certain localities by those 
males which were able to conquer their rivals, or were 
the most attractive to the females, would probably be 
transmitted to the offspring, and would not subse- 
quently be eliminated. During the succeeding seasons, 
when, from the equality of the sexes, every male was 
able to procure a female, the stronger or more at- 
tractive males previously produced would still have at 
least as good a chance of leaving offspring as the 
weaker or less attractive. 

Polygamy . — The practice of polygamy leads to the 
same results as would follow from an actual inequality 
in the number of the sexes ; for if each male secures 
two or more females, many males cannot pair ; and the 
latter assuredly will be the weaker or less attractive 
individuals. Many mammals and some few birds are 
polygamous, but with animals belonging to the lower 
classes I have found no evidence of this habit. The 
intellectual powers of such animals are, perhaps, not 
sufficient to lead them to collect and guard a harem of 
females. That some relation exists between polygamy 
and the development of secondary sexual characters, 
appears nearly certain ; and this supports the view 
that a numerical preponderance of males would be 
eminently favourable to the action of sexual selection. 
Nevertheless many animals, which are strictly mono- 
gamous, especially birds, display strongly-marked 
secondary sexual characters ; whilst some few animals, 
which are polygamous, do not have such characters. 

We will first briefly run through the mammals, and 
then turn to birds. The gorilla seems to be poly- 
gamous, and the male differs considerably from the 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


335 


female ; so it is with some baboons, which live in herds 
containing twice as many adult females as males. In 
South America the Mycetes caraya presents well-marked 
sexual differences, in colour, heard, and vocal organs ; 
and the male generally lives with two or three wives : 
the male of the Gebus capucinus differs somewhat from 
the female, and appears to he polygamous.^® Little 
is known on this head with respect to most other 
monkeys, but some species are strictly monogamous. 
The ruminants are eminently polygamous, and they 
present sexual differences more frequently than almost 
any other group of mammals ; this holds good, especially 
in their weapons, but also in other characters. Most 
deer, cattle, and sheep are polygamous ; as are most 
antelopes, though some are monogamous. Sir Andrew 
Smith, in speaking of the antelopes of South Africa, 
says that in herds of about a dozen there was rarely 
more than one mature male. The Asiatic Antilope 
miga appears to be the most inordinate polygamist in 
the world ; for Pallas states that the male drives 
away all rivals, and collects a herd of about a hundred 
females and kids together ; the female is hornless and 
has softer hair, but does not otherwise differ much from 
the male. The wild horse of the Falkland Islands and 
of the Western States of N. America is polygamous. 


On the Grorilla, Savage and 
Wyman, ‘Boston Journal of Nat. 
Hist.’ vol. V. 1845-47, p. 423. 
On Cynocephalus, Brehm , ‘ Illust. 
Thierleben,’ B. i. 1864, s. 77. 
On Mycetes, Bengger, ‘Natur- 
gesch. : Saugethiere von Para- 
guay,’ 1830, ss. 14, 20. Cebus, 
Brehm, ibid. s. 108. 

Pallas, ‘ Spicilegia Zoolog., 


Ease.’ xii. 1777, p. 29. Sir 
Andrew Smith, ‘ Illustrations of 
the Zoology of S. Africa,’ 1849, 
pi. 29, on the Kobus. Owen, in 
his ‘ Anatomy of Vertebrates ’ 
(vol. iii. 1868, p. 633) gives a 
table shewing incidentally which 
species of antelopes are grega- 
rious. 


336 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


but, except in his greater size and in the proportions 
of his body, differs but little from the mare. The wild 
boar presents well-marked sexual characters, in his 
great tusks and some other points. In Europe and in 
India he leads a solitary life, except during the breed- 
ing-season ; but as is believed by Sir W. Elliot, who 
has had many opportunities in India of observing this 
animal, he consorts at this season with several females. 
Whether this holds good in Europe is doubtful, but it 
is supported by some evidence. The adult male Indian 
elephant, like the boar, passes much of his time in soli- 
tude ; but as Dr. Campbell states, when with others, 
“ it is rare to find more than one male with a whole 
“ herd of females ; ” the larger males expelling or 
killing the smaller and weaker ones. The male differs 
from the female in his immense tusks, greater size, 
strength, and endurance ; so great is the difference in 
these respects, that the males when caught are valued 
at one-fifth more than the females.^^ The sexes of 
other pachydermatous animals differ very little or not 
at all, and, as far as known, they are not polygamists. 
Nor have I heard of any species in the Orders of 
Cheiroptera, Edentata, Insectivora and Eodents being 
polygamous, excepting that amongst the Eodents, the 
common rat, according to some rat-catchers, lives with 
several females. Nevertheless the two sexes of some 
sloths (Edentata) differ in the character and colour of 
certain patches of hair on their shoulders. And 
many kinds of bats (Cheiroptera) present well-marked 
sexual differences, chiefly in the males possessing 

Dr. Campbell, in ‘ Proc. Asiatic Soc. ot Bengal,’ May, 
Zoolog. Soc.’ 1869, p. 138. See 1868. 

also an interesting paper, by Dr. Gray, in ‘ Annals and 

Ciwt. Johnstonej in ‘Prop. Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ 1871, p. 302, 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


337 


odoriferous glands and pouches, and by their being of a 
lighter colour.^^ In the great order of Eodents, as far 
as I can learn, the sexes rarely differ, and when they 
do so, it is but slightly in the tint of the fur. 

As I hear from Sir Andrew Smith, the lion in South 
Africa sometimes lives with a single female, hut 
generally with more, and, in one case, was found with 
as many as five females ; so that he is polygamous. 
As far as I can discover, he is the only polygamist 
amongst all the terrestrial Carnivora, and he alone 
presents well-marked sexual characters. If, however, 
we turn to the marine Carnivora, as we shall hereafter 
see, the case is widely different ; for many species of 
seals offer extraordinary sexual differences, and they 
are eminently polygamous. Thus, according to Peron, 
the male sea-elephant of the Southern Ocean always 
possesses several females, and the sea-lion of Forster is 
said to he surrounded by from twenty to thirty females. 
In the North, the male sea-bear of Steller is accom- 
panied by even a greater number of females. It is an 
interesting fact, as Dr. Oill remarks,^® that in the 
monogamous species, “ or those living in small com- 
‘‘ munities, there is little difference in size between the 
“ males and females ; in the social species, or rather 

those of which the males have harems, the males are 
“ vastly larger than the females.” 

Amongst birds, many species, the sexes of which 
differ greatly from each other, are certainly monoga- 
mous. In great Britain we see well-marked sexual 
differences, for instance, in the wild-duck which pairs 

** See Dr. Dobson’s excellent The Eared Seals, ‘American 

pai)er in ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ Naturalist,’ vol. iv., Jan. 1871. 
1873, p. 241. 

Z 


338 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


with a single female, the common blackbird, and the 
bullfinch which is said to pair for life. I am informed 
by Mr. Wallace that the like is true of the Chatterers 
, or Ootingidae of South America, and of many other 
birds. In several groups I have not been able to 
discover whether the species are polygamous or mono- 
gamous. Lesson says that birds of paradise, so re- 
markable for their sexual differences, are polygamous, 
but Mr. Wallace doubts whether he had sufficient 
evidence. Mr. Salvin tells me he has been led to 
believe that humming-birds are polygamous. The 
male widow-bird, remarkable for his caudal plumes, 
certainly seems to be a polygamist.^® I have been 
assured by Mr. Jenner Weir and by others, that it is 
somewhat common for three starlings to frequent the 
same nest ; but whether this is a case of polygamy or 
polyandry has not been ascertained. 

The Gallinaceae exhibit almost as strongly marked 
sexual differences as birds of paradise or humming- 
birds, and many of the species are, as is well known, 
polygamous ; others being strictly monogamous. 
What a contrast is presented between the sexes of the 
polygamous peacock or pheasant, and the monogamous 
guinea-fowl or partridge ! Many similar cases could 
be given, as in the grouse tribe, in which the males of 
the polygamous capercailzie and black-cock differ 
greatly from the females ; whilst the sexes of the 
monogamous red grouse and ptarmigan differ very 

‘ The Ibis,’ vol. iii. 1861 p. see L. Lloyd, ‘ Game Birds of 
133, on the Progae Widow- Sweden,’ 1867, p. 19, and 182. 
bird. See also on the Vidua Montagu and Selby speak of 
axillaris, ibid. voK ii. 1860, p. the Black Grouse as polygamous 
211. On the polygamy of the and of the Bed Grouse as mono- 
Capercailzie and Great Bustard, gamous. 


Chap. VIU. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


339 


little. In the Cursores, except amongst the bustards, 
few species offer strongly-marked sexual differences, 
and the great bustard (Otis tarda) is said to be poly- 
gamous. With the Grallatores, extremely few species 
differ sexually, but the ruff (Machetes pugnax) affords a 
marked exception, and this species is believed by 
Montagu to he a polygamist. Hence it appears that 
amongst birds there often exists a close relation 
between polygamy and the development of strongly- 
marked sexual differences. I asked Mr. Bartlett, of 
the Zoological Gardens, who has had very large ex- 
perience with birds, whether the male tragopan (one of 
the Gallinaceae) was polygamous, and I was struck by 
his answering, “ I do not know, but should think so 
“ from his splendid colours.” 

It deserves notice that the instinct of pairing with a 
single female is easily lost under domestication. The 
wild-duck is strictly monogamous, the domestic-duck 
highly polygamous. The Eev. W. D. Fox informs me 
that out of some half-tamed wild-ducks, on a large 
pond in his neighbourhood, so many mallards were 
shot by the gamekeeper that only one was left for 
every seven or eight females ; yet unusually large 
broods were reared. The guinea-fowl is strictly 
monogamous ; but Mr. Fox finds that his birds succeed 
best when he keeps one cock to two or three hens. 
Canary-birds pair in a state of nature, but the breeders 
in England successfully put one male to four or five 
females. I have noticed these cases, as rendering it 
probable that wild monogamous species might readily 
become either temporarily or permanently polygamous. 

Too little is known of the habits of reptiles and 
fishes to enable us to speak of their marriage arrange- 


340 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


ments. The s tickle-back (Gasterosteus), however, is 
said to be a polygamist ; and the male during the 
breeding season differs conspicuously from the female. 

To sum up on the means through which, as far as 
we can judge, sexual selection has led to the deve- 
lopment of secondary sexual characters. It has been 
shewn that the largest number of vigorous offspring 
will be reared from the pairing of the strongest and 
best-armed males, victorious in contests over other 
males, with the most vigorous and best-nourished 
females, which are the first to breed in the spring. If 
such females select the more attractive, and at the 
same time vigorous males, they will rear a larger 
number of offspring than the retarded females, which 
must pair with the less vigorous and less attractive 
males. So it will be if the more vigorous males select 
the more attractive and at the same time healthy and 
vigorous females ; and this will especially hold good if 
the male defends the female, and aids in providing food 
for the young. The advantage thus gained by the 
more vigorous pairs in rearing a larger number of 
offspring has apparently sufficed to render sexual 
selection efficient. But a large numerical prepon- 
derance of males over females will be still more 
efficient ; whether the preponderance is only occasional 
and local, or permanent ; whether it occurs at birth, or 
afterwards from the greater destruction of the females ; 
or whether it indirectly follows from the practice of 
polygamy. 

The Male generally more modified than the Female . — 
Throughout the animal kingdom, when the sexes_ differ 
” Noel Humphreys, ‘ Kiver Grarderis,’ 1857. 


Chap. VTII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


341 


in external appearance, it is, with rare exceptions, the 
male which has been the more modified ; for, generally, 
the female retains a closer resemblance to the young of 
her own species, and to other adult members of the 
game group. The cause of this seems to lie in the 
males of almost all animals having stronger passions 
than the females. Hence it is the males that fight 
together and sedulously display their charms before 
the females ; and the victors transmit their superiority 
to their male offspring. Why both sexes do not thus 
acquire the characters of their fathers, will be con- 
sidered hereafter. That the males of all mammals 
eagerly pursue the females is notorious to every one. 
So it is with birds ; but many cock birds do not so 
much pursue the hen, as display their plumage, per- 
form strange antics, and pour forth their song in her 
presence. The male in the few fish observed seems 
much more eager than the female ; and the same is 
true of alligators, and apparently of Batrachians. 
Throughout the enormous class of insects, as Kirby 
remarks,^® “ the law is, that the male shall seek the 
“female.” Two good authorities, Mr. Blackwall and 
Mr. C. Spence Bate, tell me that the males of spiders 
and crustaceans are more active and more erratic in 
their habits than the females. When the organs of 
sense or locomotion are present in the one sex of insects 
and crustaceans and absent in the other, or when, as is 
frequently the case, they are more highly developed in 
the one than in the other, it is, as far as I can discover, 
almost invariably the male which retains such organs, 
or has them most developed ; and this shews that the 

Kirby and Spence, ‘ Introduction to Entomology, vol. iil 
1826, p. 342. 


342 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


male is the more active member in the courtship of the 
sexes. 

The female, on the other hand, with the rarest 
exceptions, is less eager than the male. As the illus- 
trious Hunter^® long ago observed, she generally 
“ requires to be courted ; ” she is coy, and may often 
be seen endeavouring for a long time to escape from 
the male. Every observer of the habits of animals will 
be able to call to mind instances of this kind. It is 
shown by various facts, given hereafter, and by the 
results fairly attributable to sexual selection, that the 
female, though comparatively passive, generally exerts 
some choice and accepts one male in preference to 
others. Or she may accept, as appearances would 
sometimes lead us to believe, not the male which is the 
most attractive to her, but the one which is the least 
distasteful. The exertion of some choice on the part of 
the female seems a law almost as general as the 
eagerness of the male. 

We are naturally led to enquire why the male, in so 
many and such distinct classes, has become more eager 
than the female, so that he searches for her, and plays 
the more active part in courtship. It would be no 
advantage and some loss of power if each sex searched 


One parasitic Hymenopter- 
ous insect (Westwood, ‘Modern 
Class, of Insects,’ vol. ii. p. 160) 
forms an exception to the rule, 
as the male has rudimentary 
wings, and never quits the cell 
in which it is horn, whilst the 
female has well-developed wings. 
Audouin believes that the fe- 
males of this species are impreg- 
nated by the males which are 
born in the same cells with 


them ; but it is much more 
probable that the females visit 
other cells, so that close inter- 
breeding is thus avoided. We 
shall hereafter meet in various 
classes, with a few exceptional 
cases, in which the female, 
instead of the male, is the seeker 
and wooer. 

‘ Essays and Observations,’ 
edited by Owen, vol. i. 1861, p. 
194. 


Chap. Vm. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


343 


for the other; but why should the male almost always 
be the seeker ? The ovules of plants after fertilisation 
have to be nourished for a time ; hence the pollen is 
necessarily brought to the female organs — being placed 
on the stigma, by means of insects or the wind, or by 
the spontaneous movements of the stamens ; and in 
the Algae, &c., by the locomotive power of the anthero- 
zooids. With lowly-organised aquatic animals, per- 
manently affixed to the same spot and having their 
sexes separate, the male element is invariably brought 
to the female ; and of this we can see the reason, for 
even if the ova were detached before fertilisation, and 
did not require subsequent nourishment or protection, 
there would yet be greater difficulty in transporting 
them than the male element, because, being larger than 
the latter, they are produced in far smaller numbers. 
So that many of the lower animals are, in this 
respect, analogous with plants.^^ The males of affixed 
and aquatic animals having been led to emit their 
fertilising element in this way, it is natural that any 
of their descendants, which rose in the scale and 
became locomotive, should retain the same habit ; and 
they would approach the female as closely as possible, 
in order not to risk the loss of the fertilising element 
in a long passage of it through the water. With some 
few of the lower animals, the females alone are fixed, 
and the males of these must be the seekers. But it is 
difficult to understand why the males of species, of 
which the progenitors were primordially iree, should 
invariably have acquired the habit of approaching the 

^ Prof. Sachs (‘ Lehrbuch der “ verhalt sich die eine bei der 
Bolanik,’ 1870, s. 633) in speak- “ Vereinigung activ, . . . die 

ing of the male and female “ andere erscheint bei der V^- 

reproductive cells, remarks, “ reinigung passiv.” 


344 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


females, instead of being approached by them. But in 
all cases, in order that the males should seek efficiently, 
it would be necessary that they should be endowed 
with strong passions ; and the acquirement of such 
' passions would naturally follow from the more eager 
leaving a larger number of offspring than the less 
eager. 

The great eagerness of the males has thus indirectly 
led to their much more frequently developing secondary 
sexual characters than the females. But the develop- 
ment of such characters would be much aided, if the 
males were more liable to vary than the females — as I 
concluded they were — after a long study of domesti- 
cated animals. Von Nathusius, who has had very wide 
experience, is strongly of the same opinion. Grood 
evidence also in favour of this conclusion can be 
produced by a comparison of the two sexes in mankind. 
During the Novara Expeditions^ a vast number of 
measurements was made of various parts of the body 
in different races, and the men were found in almost 
every case to present a greater range of variation than 
the women; but I shall have to recur to this subject in 
a future chapter. Mr. J. Wood,^^ who has carefully 
attended to the variation of the muscles in man, puts 
in italics the conclusion that “ the greatest number of 
“abnormalities in each subject is found in the males.” 
He had previously remarked that “ altogether in 102 

22 ‘ Vortrage iiber Viehzucht,’ variability of the males of 

1872, p. 63. domesticated animals, see my 

23 ‘ Keise der Novara : An thro- ‘Variation of Animals and 

polog. Theil,’ 1867, ss. 216-269. Plants under Domestication,’ 
The results were calculated by vol. ii. 1868, p. 75. 

Dr. Weisbach from measure- ^ ‘ Proceedings Koyal Soc.’ 
ments made by Drs. K. Scherzer vol. xvi. July 1868, pp. 519 and 
and Schwarz. On the greater 524. 


Ch.\p. YIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


345 


“subjects, the varieties of redundancy were found to 
“be half as many again as in females, contrasting 
“ widely with the greater frequency of deficiency in 
“ females before described.” Professor Macalister like- 
wise remarks that variations in the muscles “ are 
“ probably more common in males than females.” 
Certain muscles which are not normally present in 
mankind are also more frequently developed in the 
male than in the female sex, although exceptions to 
this rule are said to occur. Dr. Burt Wilder^® has 
tabulated the cases of 152 individuals with supernu- 
merary digits, of which 86 were males, and 39, or less 
than half, females, the remaining 27 being of unknown 
sex. It should not, however, be overlooked that women 
would more frequently endeavour to conceal a deformity 
of this kind than men. Again, Dr. L. Meyer asserts 
that the ears of man are more variable in form than 
those of a woman.^^ Lastly the temperature is more 
variable in man than in woman.^® 

The cause of the greater general variability in the 
male sex, than in the female is unknown, except in so 
far as secondary sexual characters are extraordinarily 
variable, and are usually confined to the males ; and, as 
we shall presently see, this fact is, to a certain extent, 
intelligible. Through the action of sexual and natural 
selection male animals have been rendered in very 
many instances widely diflferent from their females; 
but independently of selection the two sexes, from 

*■’ ‘Proc. Koyal Irish Aca- ^ The conclusions recently 
demy,’ vol. x. 1868, p. 123. arrived at by Dr. J. Stockton 

“ ‘Massachusetts Medical Hough, on the temperature of 
Soc.’ vol. ii. No. 3, 1868, p. 9. man, are given in the ‘ Pop. 

” ‘ Archiv fiir Path. Anat. Science Review,’ Jan. 1st 1874, 
undPh\ s.’1871, p. 488. p. 97. 


346 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


differing constitutionally, tend to vary in a somewhat 
different manner. The female has to expend much 
organic matter in the formation of her ova, whereas 
the male expends much force in fierce contests with 
' his rivals, in wandering about in search of the female, 
in exerting his voice, pouring out odoriferous secre- 
tions, &c. : and this expenditure is generally concen- 
trated within a short period. The great vigour of the 
male during the season of love seems often to intensify 
his colours, independently of any marked difference 
from the female.^® In mankind, and even as low down 
in the organic scale as in the Lepidoptera, the tem- 
perature of the body is higher in the male than in the 
female, accompanied in the case of man by a slower 
pulse.^® On the whole the expenditure of matter and 
force by the two sexes is probably nearly equal, 
though effected in very different ways and at different 
fates. 

From the causes just specified the two sexes can 
hardly fail to differ somewhat in constitution, at least 
during the breeding season ; and, although they may 
be subjected to exactly the same conditions, they will 
tend to vary in a different manner. If such variations 
are of no service to either sex, they will not be accu- 
mulated and increased by sexual or natural selection. 


^ Prof. Mantegazza is in- 
clined to believe (‘ Lettera a 
Carlo Darwin,’ ‘ Arcbivio per 
I’Anthropologia,’ 1871, p. 306) 
that the bright colours, common 
in so many male animals, are 
due to the presence and reten- 
tion by them of the spermatic 
fluid ; but this can hardly be 
the case ; for many male birds, 
for instance young pheasants, 


become brightly coloured in the 
autumn of their first year. 

For mankind, see Dr. J. 
Stockton Hough, whose con- 
clusions are given in the ‘ Pop. 
Science Keview,’ 1874, p. 97. 
See Girard’s observations on the 
Lepidoptera, as given in the 
‘ Zoological Record,’ 1869, p. 
347. 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


347 


Nevertheless, they may become permanent if the 
exciting cause acts permanently ; and in accordance 
with a frequent form of inheritance they may he 
transmitted to that sex alone in which they first 
appeared. In this case the two sexes will come to 
present permanent, yet unimportant, differences of 
character. For instance, Mr. Allen shews that with a 
large number of birds inhabiting the northern and 
southern United States, the specimens from the south 
are darker-coloured than those from the north ; and 
this seems to be the direct result of the difference in 
temperature, light, &c., between the two regions. Now, 
in some few cases, the two sexes of the same species 
appear to have been differently affected ; in the Agelseus 
phoeniceus the males have had their colours greatly 
intensified in the south ; whereas with Cardinalis 
virginianus it is the females which have been thus 
affected ; with Quiscalus major the females have been 
rendered extremely variable in tint, whilst the males 
remain nearly uniform.^^ 

A few exceptional cases occur in various classes of 
animals, in which the females instead of the males have 
acquired well pronounced secondary sexual characters, 
such as brighter colours, greater size, strength, or 
pugnacity. With birds there has sometimes been a 
complete transposition of the ordinary characters 
proper to each sex ; the females having become the 
more eager in courtship, the males remaining com- 
paratively passive, but apparently selecting the more 
attractive females, as we may infer from the results. 
Certain hen birds have thus been rendered more highly 
coloured or otherwise ornamented, as well as more 
“ ‘ Mammals and Birds of E. Florida,* pp. 234, 280, 295. 


348 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


powerful and pugnacious than the cocks ; these charac- 
ters being transmitted to the female offspring alone. 

It may he suggested that in some cases a double 
process of selection has been carried on ; that the 
'males have selected the more attractive females, and 
the latter the more attractive males. This process, 
however, though it might lead to the modification of 
both sexes, would not make the one sex different from 
the other, unless indeed their tastes for the beautiful 
differed ; but this is a supposition too improbable to 
be worth considering in the case of any animal, 
excepting man. There are, however, many animals in 
which the sexes resemble each other, both being 
furnished with the same ornaments, which analogy 
would lead us to attribute to the agency of sexual 
selection. In such cases it may be suggested with 
more plausibility, that there has been a double or 
mutual process of sexual selection ; the more vigorous 
and precocious females selecting the more attractive 
and vigorous males, the latter rejecting all except the 
more attractive females. But from what we know of 
the habits of animals, this view is hardly probable, for 
the male is generally eager to pair with any female. 
It is more probable that the ornaments common to 
both sexes were acquired by one sex, generally the 
male, and then transmitted to the offspring of both 
sexes. If, indeed, during a lengthened period the 
males of any species were greatly to exceed the females 
in number, and then during another lengthened period, 
but under different conditions, the reverse were to 
occur, a double, but not simultaneous, process of sexual 
selection might easily be carried on, by which the two 
sexes might be rendered widely different. 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


349 


We shall hereafter see that many animals exist, of 
which neither sex is brilliantly coloured or provided 
with special ornaments, and yet the members of both 
sexes or of one alone have probably acquired simple 
colours, such as white or black, through sexual 
selection. The absence of bright tints or other orna- 
ments may be the result of variations of the right kind 
never having occurred, or of the animals themselves 
having preferred plain black or white. Obscure tints 
have often been developed through natural selection 
for the sake of protection, and the acquirement through 
sexual selection of conspicuous colours, appears to have 
been sometimes checked from the danger thus incurred. 
But in other cases the males during long ages may 
have struggled together for the possession of the 
females, and yet no effect will have been produced, 
unless a larger number of offspring were left by the 
more successful males to inherit their superiority, than 
by the less successful : and this, as previously shewn, 
depends on many complex contingencies. 

Sexual selection acts in a less rigorous manner than 
natural selection. The latter produces its effects by 
the life or death at all ages of the more or less success- 
ful individuals. Death, indeed, not rarely ensues from 
the conflicts of rival males. But generally the less 
successful male merely fails to obtain a female, or 
obtains a retarded and less vigorous female later in the 
season, or, if polygamous, obtains fewer females; so 
that they leave fewer, less vigorous, or no offspring. 
In regard to structures acquired through ordinary or 
natural selection, there is in most cases, as long as 
the conditions of life remain the same, a limit to the 
amount of advantageous modification in relation to 


350 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


certain special purposes ; but in regard to structures 
adapted to make one male victorious over another, 
either in fighting or in charming the female, there is 
no definite limit to the amount of advantageous 
modification ; so that as long as the proper variations 
arise the work of sexual selection will go on. This 
circumstance may partly account for the frequent and 
extraordinary amount of variability presented by 
secondary sexual characters. Nevertheless, natural 
selection will determine that such characters shall not 
be acquired by the victorious males, if they would be 
highly injurious, either by expending too much of their 
vital powers, or by exposing them to any great danger. 
The development, however, of certain structures — of 
the horns, for instance, in certain stags — has been 
carried to a wonderful extreme ; and in some cases to 
an extreme which, as far as the general conditions of 
life are concerned, must be slightly injurious to the 
male. From this fact we learn that the advantages 
which favoured males derive from conquering other 
males in battle or courtship, and thus leaving a 
numerous progeny, are in the long run greater than 
those derived from rather more perfect adaptation to 
their conditions of life. We shall further see, and it 
could never have been anticipated, that the power to 
charm the female has sometimes been more important 
than the power to conquer other males in battle. 


I.AWS OF INHERITANCE. 

In order to understand how sexual selection has 
acted on many animals of many classes, and in the 
course of ages has produced a conspicuous result, it is 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


351 


necessary to bear in mind the laws of inheritance, as 
far as they are known. Two distinct elements are 
included under the term “ inheritance ” — the trans- 
mission, and the development of characters; but as 
these generally go together, the distinction is often 
overlooked. We see this distinction in those characters 
which are transmitted through the early years of life, 
but are developed only at maturity or during old age. 
We see the same distinction more clearly with secon- 
dary sexual characters, for these are transmitted through 
both sexes, though developed in one alone. That they 
are present in both sexes, is manifest when two species, 
having strongly-marked sexual characters, are crossed, 
for each transmits the characters proper to its own 
male and female sex to the hybrid offspring of either 
sex. The same fact is likewise manifest, when 
characters proper to the male are occasionally deve- 
loped in the female when she grows old or becomes 
diseased, as, for instance, when the common hen 
assumes the flowing tail-feathers, hackles, comb, spurs, 
voice, and even pugnacity of the cock. Conversely, the 
same thing is evident, more or less plainly, with cas- 
trated males. Again, independently of old age or 
disease, characters are occasionally transferred from 
the male to the female, as when, in certain breeds of 
the fowl, spurs regularly appear in the young and 
healthy females. But in truth they are simply deve- 
loped in the female ; for in every breed each detail in 
the structure of the spur is transmitted through the 
female to her male offspring. Many cases will here- 
after be given, where the female exhibits, more or less 
perfectly, characters proper to the male, in whom they 
must have been first developed, and then transferred 


352 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part H 


to the female. The converse case of the first develop- 
ment of characters in the female and of transference 
to the male, is less frequent ; it will therefore be well 
, to give one striking instance. With bees the pollen- 
collecting apparatus is used by the female alone for 
gathering pollen for the larvae, yet in most of the 
species it is partially developed in the males to whom 
it is quite useless, and it is perfectly developed in the 
males of Bombus or the humble-bee.^^ As not a single 
other Hymenopterous insect, not even the wasp, which 
is closely allied to the bee, is provided with a pollen- 
collecting apparatus, we have no grounds for supposing 
that male bees primordially collected pollen as well as 
the females ; although we have some reason to suspect 
that male mammals primordially suckled their young 
as well as the females. Lastly, in all cases of reversion, 
characters are transmitted through two, three, or 
many more generations, and are then developed under 
certain unknown favourable conditions. This im- 
portant distinction between transmission and develop- 
ment will be best kept in mind by the aid of the 
hypothesis of pangenesis. According to this hypothesis, 
every unit or cell of the body throws off gemmules or 
undeveloped atoms, which are transmitted to the off- 
spring of both sexes, and are multiplied by self-division. 
Tney may remain undeveloped during the early years 
of life or during successive generations ; and their 
development into units or cells, like those from which 
they were derived, depends on their affinity for, and 
union with other units or cells previously developed in 
the due order of growth. 

“ H. Muller, ‘ Anwendung der Darwin’schen Lebre,’ &c. Verb, 
d. D. V. Jabrg. xxix. p. 42. 


Chap. Vin. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


353 


Inheritance at corresponding Periods of Life . — This 
tendency is well established. A new character, ap- 
pearing in a young animal, whether it lasts through- 
out life or is only transient, will, in general, reappear 
in the offspring at the same age and last for the same 
time. If, on the other hand, a new character appears 
at maturity, or even during old age, it tends to re- 
appear in the offspring at the same advanced age. 
When deviations from this rule occur, the transmitted 
characters much oftener appear before, than after the 
corresponding age. As I have dwelt on this subject 
sufficiently in another work,^® I will here merely give 
two or three instances, for the sake of recalling the 
subject to the reader’s mind. In several breeds of the 
Fowl, the down-covered chickens, the young birds in 
their first true plumage, and the adults differ greatly 
from one another, as well as from their common parent- 
form, the Gallus hanJciva; and these characters are 
faithfully transmitted by each breed to their offspring 
at the corresponding periods of life. For instance, the 
chickens of spangled Hamburgs, whilst covered with 
down, have a few dark spots on the head and rump, but 
are not striped longitudinally, as in many other 
breeds ; in their first true plumage, “ they are beauti- 
fully pencilled,” that is each feather is transversely 
marked by numerous dark bars ; but in their second 
plumage the feathers all become spangled or tipped 
with a dark round spot.^^ Hence in this breed 

“ ‘ The Variation of Animals ^ These facts are given on the 
and Plants under Domestication,’ high authority of a great breeder, 
vol. ii. 1868, p. 75. In the last Mr. Teebay; see TegetineiePs 
chapter but one, the provisional ‘ Poultry Book,’ 1868, p. 168. 
hy[)othesi8 of pangenesis, above On the characters of chickeos of 
alluded to, is fully explained. different breeds, and on the 

2 A 


354 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part IT 

variations have occurred at, and been transmitted to, 
three distinct periods of life. The Pigeon offers a 
more remarkable case, because the aboriginal parent 
species does not undergo any change of plumage with 
advancing age, excepting that at maturity the breast 
becomes more iridescent ; yet there are breeds which 
do not acquire their characteristic colours until they 
have moulted two, three, or four times ; and these 
modifications of plumage are regularly transmitted. 

Inheritance at corres]ponding Seasons of the Year . — 
With animals in a state of nature, innumerable in- 
stances occur of characters appearing periodically at 
different seasons. We see this in the horns of the 
stag, and in the fur of arctic animals which becomes 
thick and white during the winter. Many birds 
acquire bright colours and other decorations during 
the breeding-season alone. Pallas states,^® that in 
Siberia domestic cattle and horses become lighter- 
coloured during the winter; and I have myself ob- 
served, and heard of similar strongly marked changes 
of colour, that is, from brownish cream-colour or 
reddish-brown to a perfect white, in several ponies in 
England. Although I do not know that this tendency 
to change the colour of the coat during different seasons 
is transmitted, yet it probably is so, as all shades of 
colour are strongly inherited by the horse. Nor is 


breeds of the pigeon, alluded to colour by the horse, see ‘ Varia- 

in the following paragraph, see tion of Animals, &c., under 

‘Variation of Animals,’ &c.. Domestication,’ vol. i. p. 51. 

vol. i. pp. 160, 249 ; vol. ii. p. 77. Also vol. ii. p. 71, for a general 

“ ‘Novae species Quadrupe- discussion on ‘Inheritance as 

dum 6 Glirium ordine,’ 1778, limited by Sex,* 

p. 7, On the transmission of 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


865 


this form of inheritance, as limited by the seasons, 
more remarkable than its limitation by age or sex. 

Inheritance as Limited hy Sex . — The eqnal trans- 
mission of characters to both sexes is the commonest 
form of inheritance, at least with those animals which 
do not present strongly-marked sexual differences, and 
indeed with many of these. But characters are some- 
what commonly transferred exclusively to that sex, in 
which they first appear. Ample evidence on this head 
has been advanced in my work on ‘ Variation under 
Domestication,’ but a few instances may here be given. 
There are breeds of the sheep and goat, in which the 
horns of the male differ greatly in shape from those of 
the female ; and these differences, acquired under 
domestication, are regularly transmitted to the same 
sex. As a rule, it is the females alone in cats which 
are tortoise-shell, the corresponding colour in the males 
being rusty-red. With most breeds of the fowl, the 
characters proper to each sex are transmitted to the 
same sex alone. So general is this form of transmis- 
sion that it is an anomaly when variations in certain 
breeds are transmitted equally to both sexes. There 
are also certain sub-breeds of the fowl in which the 
males can hardly be distinguished from one another, 
whilst the females differ considerably in colour. The 
sexes of the pigeon in the parent-species do not differ 
in any external character; nevertheless, in certain 
domesticated breeds the male is coloured differently 
from the female.®® The wattle in the English Carrier 

** Dr. Chapuis, ‘Le Pigeon See, also, on similar differences 
Voyageur Belue,’ 1865, p. 87. in certain breeds at Modena, ‘ Le 
Boitard et Corbie, ‘ Les Pigeons variazioni dei Colombi domes- 
de Voli^re,* &c., 1824-, p. 173. tici,’ del Paolo Bonizzi, 1873. 


856 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


pigeon, and the crop in the Pouter, are more highly 
developed in the male than in the female; and al- 
though these characters have been gained through 
long-continued selection by man, the slight dijSferences 
between the sexes are wholly due to the form of 
inheritance which has prevailed ; for they have arisen, 
not from, but rather in opposition to, the wish of the 
breeder. 

Most of our domestic races have been formed by the 
accumulation of many slight variations ; and as some 
of the successive steps have been transmitted to one 
sex alone, and some to both sexes, we find in the 
different breeds of the same species all gradations 
between great sexual dissimilarity and complete simi- 
larity. Instances have already been given with the 
breeds of the fowl and pigeon, and under nature 
analogous cases are common. With animals under 
domestication, but whether in nature I will not venture 
to say, one sex may lose characters proper to it, and 
may thus come somewhat to resemble the opposite 
sex ; for instance, the males of some breeds of the fowl 
have lost their masculine tail-plumes and hackles. 
On the other hand, the differences between the sexes 
may be increased under domestication, as with merino 
sheep, in which the ewes have lost their horns. Again, 
characters proper to one sex may suddenly appear in 
the other sex ; as in those sub-breeds of the fowl in 
which the hens acquire spurs whilst young ; or, as in 
certain Polish sub-breeds, in which the females, as 
there is reason to believe, originally acquired a crest, 
and subsequently transferred it to the males. All 
these cases are intelligible on the hypothesis of pan- 
genesis ; for they depend on the gemmules of certain 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION 


357 


parts, although present in both sexes, becoming, 
through the influence of domestication, either dormant 
or developed in either sex. 

There is one difficult question which it will be 
convenient to defer to a future chapter; namely, 
whether a character at first developed in both sexes, 
fould through selection be limited in its development 
to one sex alone. If, for instance, a breeder observed 
that some of his pigeons (of which the characters are 
usually transferred in an equal degree to both sexes) 
varied into pale blue, could he by long-continued 
selection make a breed, in which the males alone should 
be of this tint, whilst the females remained unchanged ? 
I will here only say, that this, though perhaps not 
impossible, would be extremely difficult ; for the 
natural result of breeding from the pale-blue males 
would be to change the whole stock of both sexes to 
this tint. If, however, variations of the desired tint 
appeared, which were from the first limited in their 
development to the male sex, there would not be the 
least difficulty in making a breed with the two sexes 
of a different colour, as indeed has been effected with 
a Belgian breed, in which the males alone are streaked 
with black. In a similar manner, if any variation 
appeared in a female pigeon, which was from the first 
sexually limited in its development to the females, it 
would be easy to make a breed with the females alone 
thus characterised ; but if the variation was not thus 
originally limited, the process would be extremely 
difficult, perhaps impossible.*’ 

{Siuc© the publication of the (the ‘ Field, ^ Sept. 1872) from so 

first edition of this work, it has experienced a breeder as Mr. 

been highly satisfactory to^^me Tegetmeier. After descriknng 

to find the following remarks some curious cases in pigeons. 


858 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


On the Belation between the Period of Development of 
a Character and its Transmission to one Sex or to both 
Sexes, — Why certain characters should be inherited by 
both sexes, and other characters by one sex alone, 

. namely by that sex in which the character first 
appeared, is in most cases quite unknown. We cannot 
even conjecture why with certain sub-breeds of the 
pigeon, black striae, though transmitted through the 
female, should be developed in the male alone, whilst 
every other character is equally transferred to both 
sexes. Why, again, with cats, the tortoise-shell colour 
should, with rare exceptions, be developed in the 
female alone. The very same character, such as 
deficient or supernumerary digits, colour-blindness, 
&c., may with mankind be inherited by the males 
alone of one family, and in another family by the 
females alone, though in both cases transmitted through 
the opposite as well as through the same sex.®® Al- 
though we are thus ignorant, the two following rules 
seem often to hold good — that variations which first 
appear in either sex at a late period of life, tend to be 
developed in the same sex alone; whilst variations 
which first appear early in life in either sex tend to be 
developed in both sexes. I am, however, far from 
supposing that this is the sole determining cause. As 


of the transmission of colour by 
one sex alone, and the forma- 
tion of a sub-breed with this 
character, he says: “It is a 
“ singular circumstance that Mr. 
“ Darwin should hare suggested 
“the possibility of modifying 
“ the sexual colour! of birds by 
“ a course of artificial selection. 


“ When he did so, he was in 
“ ignorance of these facts that I 
“ have related ; but it is remark- 
able how very closely he sug- 
“gested the right method of 
“ procedure.” 

Keferences are given in my 
‘Variation of Animals imder 
Domestication,’ vol. ii. p. 72. 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


859 


I have not elsewhere discussed this subject, and as it 
has an important bearing on sexual selection, I must 
here enter into lengthy and somewhat intricate 
details. 

It is in itself probable that any character appearing 
at an early age would tend to be inherited equally by 
both sexes, for the sexes do not differ much in consti- 
tution before the power of reproduction is gained. On 
the other hand, after this power has been gained and 
the sexes have come to differ in constitution, the 
gemmules (if I may again use the language of pan- 
genesis) which are cast off from each varying part in 
the one sex would be much more likely to possess the 
proper affinities for uniting with the tissues of the 
same sex, and thus becoming developed, than with 
those of the opposite sex. 

I was first led to infer that a relation of this kind 
exists, from the fact that whenever and in whatever 
manner the adult male differs from the adult female, 
he differs in the same manner from the young of both 
sexes. The generality of this fact is quite remarkable : 
it holds good with almost all mammals, birds, amphi- 
bians, and fishes ; also with many crustaceans, spiders, 
and some few insects, such as certain orthoptera and 
libellulsB. In all these cases the variations, through 
the accumulation of which the male acquired his proper 
masculine characters, must have occurred at a some- 
what late period of life ; otherwise the young males 
would have been similarly characterised; and con- 
formably with our rule, the variations are transmitted 
to and developed in the adult males alone. When, on 
the other hand, the adult male closely resembles the 
young of both sexes (these, with rare exceptions, being 


360 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


alike), he generally resembles the adult female ; and in 
most of these cases the variations through which the 
young and old acquired their present characters, 
probably occurred, according to our rule, during youth. 
But there is here room for doubt, for characters are 
sometimes transferred to the offspring at an earlier 
age than that at which they first appeared in the 
parents, so that the parents may have varied when 
adult, and have transferred their characters to their 
offspring whilst young. There are, moreover, many 
animals, in which the two sexes closely resemble each 
other, and yet both differ from their young ; and here 
the characters of the adults must have been acquired 
late in life ; nevertheless, these characters, in apparent 
contradiction to our rule, are transferred to both sexes. 
We must not, however, overlook the possibility of even 
probability of successive variations of the same nature 
occurring, under exposure to similar conditions, simul- 
taneously in both sexes at a rather lite period of life ; 
and in this case the variations would be transferred to 
the offspring of both sexes at a corresponding late age ; 
and there would then be no real contradiction to the 
rule that variations occurring late in life are transferred 
exclusively to the sex in which they first appeared. 
This latter rule seems to hold true more generally than 
the second one, namely, that variations which occur in 
either sex early in life tend to be transferred to both 
sexes. As it was obviously impossible even to estimate 
in how large a number of cases throughout the animal 
kingdom these two propositions held good, it occurred 
to me to investigate some striking or crucial instances, 
and to rely on the result. 

An excellent case for investigation is afforded by the 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


361 


Deer family. In all the species, but one, the horns 
are developed only in the males, though certainly 
transmitted through the females, and capable of ab- 
normal development in them. In the reindeer, on the 
other hand, the female is provided with horns ; so that 
in this species, the horns ought, according to our rule, 
to appear early in life, long before the two sexes are 
mature and have come to differ much in constitution. 


In all the other species the horns ought to appear later 
in life, which would lead to their development in that 
sex alone, in which they first appeared in the progeni- 
tor of the whole Family. Now in seven species, 
belonging to distinct sections of the family and 
inhabiting different regions, in which the stags alone 
bear horns, I find that the horns first appear at periods, 
varying from nine months after birth in the roebuck, 
to ten, twelve or even more months in the stags of the 
six other and larger species.^® But with the reindeer 
the case is widely different ; for, as I hear from Prof. 
Nilsson, who kindly made special enquiries for me in 
Lapland, the horns appear in the young animals within 
four or five weeks after birth, and at the same time in 
both sexes. So that here we have a structure, deve- 
loped at a most unusually early age in one species of 
the family, and likewise common to both sexes in this 
one species alone. 


I am much obliged to Mr. 
Cupples for having made en- 
quiries for me in regard to the 
lloebuck and Red Deer of 
Scotland from Mr. Robertson, 
the experienced head- forester to 
the Marquis of Breadalbane. In 
regard to Fallow-deer, I have to 
thank Mr. Eyton and others for 
information. For the Cervus 


dices of N. America, see ‘ Land 
and Water,’ 1868, pp. 221 and 
254 ; and for the C. Virginianus 
and strongyloceros of the same 
continent, see J. D. Caton, in 
‘ Ottawa Acad, of Nat. Sc.’ 1868, 
p. 13. For Cervus Eldi of Pegu, 
see Lieut. Beavan, ‘ Proc. Zoolog. 
Soc.’ 1867, p. 762. 


362 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


In several kinds of antelopes, only the males are 
provided with horns, whilst in the greater number 
both sexes bear horns. With respect to the period of 
development, Mr. Blyth informs me that there was at 
one time in the Zoological Gardens a young koodoo 
{Ant. strejpsiceros)^ of which the males alone are horned, 
and also the young of a closely-allied species, the eland 
{Ant. oreas), in which both sexes are horned. Now it 
is in strict conformity with our rule, that in the young 
male koodoo, although ten months old, the horns were 
remarkably small, considering the size ultimately 
attained by them ; whilst in the young male eland, 
although only three months old, the horns were already 
very much larger than in the koodoo. It is also a 
noticeable fact that in the prong-horned antelope,*® 
only a few of the females, about one in five, have horns, 
and these are in a rudimentary state, though sometimes 
above four inches long ; so that as far as concerns the 
possession of horns by the males alone, this species is 
in an intermediate condition, and the horns do not 
appear until about five or six months after birth. 
Therefore in comparison with what little we know of 
the development of the horns in other antelopes, and 
from what we do know with respect to the horns of 
deer, cattle, &c., those of the prong-horned antelope 
appear at an intermediate period of life, — that is, not 
very early, as in cattle and sheep, nor very late, as in 
the larger deer and antelopes. The horns of sheep, 
goats, and cattle, which are well developed in both 
sexes, though not quite equal in size, can be felt, or 

^ Antilocapra Americana. I ids paper in ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soo.’ 

have to thank Dr. Canfield for 1866, p. 109. Also Owen, 

information with respect to the ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. 
horns of the female : see also in. p. 627. 


Chap. VUI. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


863 


even seen, at birth or soon afterwards/^ Our rule, 
however, seems to fail in some ibreeds of sheep, for 
instance merinos, in which the rams alone are horned ; 
for I cannot find on enquiry that the horns are 
developed later in life in this breed than in ordinary 
sheep in which both sexes are horned. But with 
domesticated sheep the presence or absence of horns is 
not a firmly fixed character ; for a certain proportion 
of the merino ewes bear small horns, and some of the 
rams are hornless ; and in most breeds hornless ewes 
are occasionally produced. 

Dr. W. Marshall has lately made a special study of 
the protuberances so common on the heads of birds, 
and he comes to the following conclusion ; — that with 
those species in which they are confined to the males, 
they are developed late in life ; whereas with those 
species in which they are common to the two sexes, 
they are developed at a very early period. This is 
certainly a striking confirmation of my two laws of 
inheritance. 

In most of the species of the splendid family of the 


I have been assured that 
the horns of the sheep in North 
Wales can always felt, and 
are sometimes even an inch in 
length, at birth. Youatt says 
(‘ Cattle,’ 1834, p. 277), that the 
prominence of the frontal bone 
in cattle penetrates the cutis 
at birth, and that the horny 
matter is soon formed over it. 

I am greatly indebted to 
Prof. Victor Cams for having 
made enquiries for me, from the 
highest authorities, with respect 
to the merino sheep of Saxony. 
On the Guinea coast of Africa 
there is, however, a breed of sheep 


in which, as with merinos, the 
rams alone bear horns ; and Mr. 
Win wood Reade informs me 
that in one case observed by 
him, a young ram, bom on 
Feb. 10th, first shewed horns 
on March 6th, so that in this 
instance, in conformity with 
mle, the development of the 
horns occurred at a later period 
of life than in Welsh sheep, in 
which both sexes are homed. 

‘ Ueber die knochernen 
Schadelhocker der Vogel’ in the 
* Niederlandischen Archiv fur 
Zoologie,’ Band I. Heft 2, 1872. 


364 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


Pheasants, the males differ conspicuously from the 
females, and they acquire their ornaments at a rather 
late period of life. The eared pheasant (CrossopHlon 
auritum), however, offers a remarkable exception, for 
both sexes possess the fine caudal plumes, the large 
ear-tufts and the crimson velvet about the head ; I 
find that all these characters appear very early in life 
in accordance with rule. The adult male can, how- 
ever, be distinguished from the adult female by the 
presence of spurs ; and conformably with our rule, 
these do not begin to be developed before the age of six 
months, as I am assured by Mr. Bartlett, and even at 
this age, the two sexes can hardly be distinguished.*^ 
The male and' female Peacock differ conspicuously from 
each other in almost every part of their plumage, 
except in the elegant head-crest, which is common to 
both sexes ; and this is developed very early in life, 
long before the other ornaments, which are confined to 
the male. The wild-duck offers an analogous case, for 
the beautiful green speculum on the wings is common 
to both sexes, though duller and somewhat smaller in 
the female, and it is developed early in life, whilst the 
curled tail-feathers and other ornaments of the male 


are developed later.*® Between such extreme cases of 


** In the common peacock 
(Favo cristatus) the male alone 
possesses spurs, whilst both sexes 
of the Java Peacock (P. muticus) 
offer the unusual case of being 
furnished with spurs. Hence I 
fully expected that in the latter 
species they would have been 
developed earlier in life than in 
the common peacock ; but M. 
Hegt of Amsterdam informs me, 
that with young birds of the 
previous year, of both species, 


compared on April 23rd, 1869, 
there was bo difference in the 
development of the spurs. The 
spurs, however, were as yet re- 
presented merely by slight knobs 
or elevations. I presume that I 
should have been informed if 
any difference in the rate of 
development had been observed 
subsequently. 

** In some other species of 
the Duck family the speculum 
differs in a greater degree in the 


Chat. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


365 


close sexual resemblance and wide dissimilarity, as 
those of the Crossoptilon and peacock, many inter- 
mediate ones could be given, in which the characters 
follow our two rules in their order of development. 

As most insects emerge from the pupal state in a 
mature condition, it is doubtful whether the period of 
development can determine the transference of their 
characters to one or to both sexes. But we do not 
know that the coloured scales, for instance, in two 
species of butterflies, in one of which the sexes diflfer in 
colour, whilst in the other they are alike, are developed 
at the same relative age in the cocoon. Nor do we 
know whether all the scales are simultaneously deve- 
loped on the wings of the same species of butterfly, in 
which certain coloured marks are confined to one sex, 
whilst others are common to both sexes. A difi’erence 
of this kind in the period of development is not so 
improbable as it may at first appear ; for with the 
Orthoptera, which assume their adult state, not by a 
single metamorphosis, but by a succession of moults, 
the young males of some species at first resemble 
the females, and acquire their distinctive masculine 


two sexes ; but I have not been 
able to discover whether its full 
development occurs later in life 
in the males of such species, 
than in the male of the common 
duck, as ought to be the case 
according to our rule. With 
the allied Mergus cucullatui we 
have, however, a case of this 
kind : the two sexes differ con- 
spicuously in general plumage, 
and to a considerable degree in 
the speculum, which is pure 


white in the male and greyish- 
white in the female. Now the 
young males at first entirely 
resemble the females, and have a 
greyish- white speculum, which 
becomes pure white at an earlier 
age than that at which the adult 
male acquires his other and 
more strongly-marked sexual 
differences : see Audubon, ‘ Or- 
nithological Biography,’ vol. iii. 
Ib35, pp. 249-250. 


366 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Parf IL 


characters only at a later moult. Strictly analogous 
cases occur at the successive moults of certain male 
crustaceans. 

We have as yet considered the transference of 
characters, relatively to their period of development, 
only in species in a natural state ; we will now turn to 
domesticated animals, and first touch on monstrosities 
and diseases. The presence of supernumerary digits, 
and the absence of certain phalanges, must he deter- 
mined at an early embryonic period — the tendency to 
profuse bleeding is at least congenital, as is probably 
colour-blindness — yet these peculiarities, and other 
similar ones, are often limited in their transmission to 
one sex ; so that the rule that characters, developed at 
an early period, tend to be transmitted to both sexes, 
here wholly fails. But this rule, as before remarked, 
does not appear to be nearly so general as the converse 
one, namely, that characters which appear late in life 
in one sex are transmitted exclusively to the same sex. 
From the fact of the above abnormal peculiarities be- 
coming attached to one sex, long before the sexual func- 
tions are active, we may infer that there must be some 
difference between the sexes at an extremely early age. 
With respect to sexually-limited diseases, we know too 
little of the period at which they originate, to draw 
any safe conclusion. Gout, however, seems to fall 
under our rule, for it is generally caused by intemper- 
ance during manhood, and is transmitted from the 
father to his sons in a much more marked manner than 
to his daughters. 

In the various domestic breeds of sheep, goats, and 
cattle, the males differ from their respective females in 
the shape or development of their horns, forehead, 


Chap. VTIT. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


367 


mane, dewlap, tail, and hump on the shoulders; and 
these peculiarities, in accordance with our rule, are not 
fully developed until a rather late period of life. The 
sexes of dogs do not differ, except that in certain 
breeds, especially in the Scotch deer-hound, the male 
is much larger and heavier than the female ; and, as 
we shall see in a future chapter, the male goes on 
increasing in size to an unusually late period of life, 
which, according to rule, will account for his increased 
size being transmitted to his male offspring alone. On 
the other hand, the tortoise-shell colour, which is con- 
fined to female cats, is quite distinct at birth, and this 
case violates the rule. There is a breed of pigeons in 
which the males alone are streaked with black, and the 
streaks can be detected even in the nestlings ; but they 
become more conspicuous at each successive moult, so 
that this case partly opposes and partly supports the 
rule. With the English Carrier and Pouter pigeons, 
the full development of the wattle and the crop occurs 
rather late in life, and conformably with the rule, 
these characters are transmitted in full perfection to 
the males alone. The following cases perhaps come with- 
in the class previously alluded to, in which both sexes 
have varied in the same manner at a rather late period 
of life, and have consequently transferred their new 
characters to both sexes at a corresponding late period ; 
and if so, these cases are not opposed to our rule : — 
there exist sub-breeds of the pigeon, described by 
Neumeister,*® in which both sexes change their colour 
during two or three moults (as is likewise the case 
with the Almond Tumbler), nevertheless, these changes, 

^ ‘ Das Gauze der Tauben- see Dr. Chapuis, ‘ Le pigeon 
zucht,’ 1837, s. 21, 24. For the voyageur Beige,’ 1865, p. 87. 
case of the streaked pigeons. 


368 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt IL 


though occurring rather late in life, are common to 
both sexes. One variety of the Canary-bird, namely 
the London Prize, offers a nearly analogous case. 

With the breeds of the Fowl the inheritance of 
various characters by one or both sexes, seems generally 
determined by the period at which such characters are 
developed. Thus in all the many breeds in which the 
adult male differs greatly in colour from the female, 
as well as from the wild parent-species, he differs also 
from the young male, so that the newly-acquired 
characters must have appeared at a rather late period 
of life. On the other hand, in most of the breeds in 
which the two sexes resemble each other, the young 
are coloured in nearly the same manner as their 
parents, and this renders it probable that their 
colours first appeared early in life. We have instances 
of this fact in all black and white breeds, in which the 
young and old of both sexes are alike ; nor can it be 
maintained that there is something peculiar in a black 
or white plumage, which leads to its transference to 
both sexes ; for the males alone of many natural 
species are either black or white, the females being 
differently coloured. With the so-called Cuckoo sub- 
breeds of the fowl, in which the feathers are trans- 
versely pencilled with dark stripes, both sexes and the 
chickens are coloured in nearly the same manner. 
The laced plumage of the Sebright bantam is the same 
in both sexes, and in the young chickens the wing- 
feathers are distinctly, though imperfectly laced. 
Spangled Hamburgs, however, offer a partial excep- 
tion ; for the two sexes, though not quite alike, 
resemble each other more closely than do the sexes of 
the aboriginal parent-species ; yet they acquire their 


Chap. Mil. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


369 


characteristic plumage late in life, for the chickens are 
distinctly pencilled. With respect to other characters 
besides colour, in the wild-parent species and in most 
of the domestie breeds, the males alone possess a well- 
developed comb ; but in the young of the Spanish fowl 
it is largely developed at a very early age, and, in 
accordance with this early development in the male, it 
is of unusual size in the adult female. In the Game 
breeds pugnacity is developed at a wonderfully early 
age, of which curious proofs could he given ; and this 
character is transmitted to both sexes, so that the hens, 
from their extreme pugnacity, are now generally 
exhibited in separate pens. With the Polish breeds 
the bony protuberance of the skull which supports the 
crest is partially developed even before the chickens 
are hatched, and the crest itself soon begins to grow, 
though at first feebly ; and in this breed the adults 
of both sexes a're characterised by a great bony pio- 
tuberance and an immense crest. 

Finally, from what we have now seen of the relation 
which exists in many natural species and domesticated 
races, between the period of the development of their 
characters and the manner of their transmission — for 
example, the striking fact of the early growth of the 
horns in the reindeer, in which both sexes bear horns, 
in comparison with their much later growth in the 
other species in which the male alone bears horns — we 
may conclude that one, though not the sole cause of 

For full particulars and re- 256. In regard to the higher 
ferences on all these points re- animals, the sexual differences 
specting the several breeds of which have arisen under domesti- 
the Fowl, see ‘Variation of cation are described in the same 
Animals and Plants under w’ork under the head of each 
Domestication,’ vol. i. pp. 250, species. 

2 B 


370 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


characters being exclusively inherited by one sex, is 
their development at a late age. And secondly, that 
one, though apparently a less efficient cause of 
^ characters being inherited by both sexes, is their deve- 
lopment at an early age, whilst the sexes dijder but 
little in constitution. It appears, however, that some 
difference must exist between the sexes even during a 
very early embryonic period, for characters developed 
at this age not rarely become attached to one sex. 

Summary and concluding remarks . — From the fore- 
going discussion on the various laws of inheritance, we 
learn that the characters of the parents often, or even 
generally, tend to become developed in the offspring of 
the same sex, at the same age, and periodically at the 
same season of the year, in which they first appeared 
in the parents. But these rules, owing to unknown 
causes, are far from being fixed. Hence during the 
modification of a species, the successive changes may 
readily be transmitted in different ways ; some to one 
sex, and some to both ; some to the offspring at one 
age, and some to the offspring at all ages. Not only 
are the laws of inheritance extremely complex, but so are 
the causes which induce and govern variability. The 
variations thus induced are preserved and accumulated 
by sexual selection, which is in itself an extremely 
complex affair, depending, as it does, on the ardour 
in love, the courage, and the rivalry of the males, as 
well as on the powers of perception, the taste, and will 
of the female. Sexual selection will also be largely 
dominated by natural selection tending towards the 
general welfare of the species. Hence the manner in 
which the individuals of either or both sexes have been 


Chap. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


871 


affected through sexual selection cannot fail to be com- 
plex in the highest degree. 

When variations occur late in life in one sex, and 
are transmitted to the same sex at the same age, the 
other sex and the young are left unmodified. When 
they occur late in life, but are transmitted to both sexes 
at the same age, the young alone are left unmodified. 
Variations, however, may occur at any period of life in 
one sex or in both, and be transmitted to both sexes at 
all ages, and then all the individuals of the species are 
similarly modified. In the following chapters it will be 
seen that all these cases frequently occur in nature. 

Sexual selection can never act on any animal before 
the age for reproduction arrives. From the great 
eagerness of the male it has generally acted on this sex 
and not on the females. The males have thus become 
provided with weapons for fighting with their rivals, 
with organs for discovering and securely holding the 
female, and for exciting or charming her. When the 
sexes differ in these respects, it is also, as we have 
seen, an extremely general law that the adult male 
differs more or less from the young male ; and we may 
conclude from this fact that the successive variations, 
by which the adult male became modified, did not 
generally occur much before the age for reproduction. 
Whenever some or many of the variations occurred 
early in life, the young males would partake more or 
less of the characters of the adult males ; and differ- 
ences of this kind between the old and young males may 
be observed in many species of animals. 

It is probable that young male animals have often 
tended to vary in a manner which would not only have 
been of no use to them at an early age, but would have 


372 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


been actually injurious — as by acquiring bright colours, 
which would render them conspicuous to their enemies, 
or by acquiring structures, such as great horns, which 
would expend much vital force in their development. 
Variations of this kind occurring in the young males 
would almost certainly be eliminated through natural 
selection. With the adult and experienced males, on 
the other hand, the advantages derived from the acquisi- 
tion of such characters, would more than counterbalance 
some exposure to danger, and some loss of vital force. 

As variations which give to the male a better chance 
of conquering other males, or of finding, securing, or 
charming the opposite sex, would, if they happened to 
arise in the female, be of no service to her, they would 
not be preserved in her through sexual selection. We 
have also good evidence with domesticated animals, 
that variations of all kinds are, if not carefully selected, 
soon lost through intercrossing and accidental deaths. 
Consequently in a state of nature, if variations of the 
above kind chanced to arise in the female line, and to 
be transmitted exclusively in this line, they would be 
extremely liable to be lost. If, however, the females 
varied and transmitted their newly acquired characters 
to their offspring of both sexes, the characters which 
were advantageous to the males would be preserved by 
them through sexual selection, and the two sexes would 
in consequence be modified in the same manner, al- 
though such characters were of no use to the females : 
but I shall hereafter have to recur to these more 
intricate contingencies. Lastly, the females may 
acquire, and apparently have often acquired by trans- 
ference, characters from the male sex. 

As variations occurring late in life, and transmitted 


Chat. VIII. 


SEXUAL SELECTION. 


373 


to one sex alone, have incessantly been taken advantage 
of and accumulated through sexual selection in relation 
to the reproduction of the species ; therefore it appears, 
at first sight, an unaccountable fact that similar 
variations have not frequently been accumulated 
through natural selection, in relation to the ordinary 
habits of life. If this had occurred, the two sexes 
would often have been differently modified, for the 
sake, for instance, of capturing prey or of escaping 
from danger. Differences of this kind between the 
two sexes do occasionally occur, especially in the lower 
classes. But this implies that the two sexes follow 
different habits in their struggles for existence, which 
is a rare circumstance with the higher animals. The 
case, however, is widely different with the reproductive 
functions, in which respect the sexes necessarily differ. 
For variations in structure which are related to these 
functions, have often proved of value to one sex, and 
from having arisen at a late period of life, have been 
transmitted to one sex alone ; and such variations, thus 
preserved and transmitted, have given rise to secondary 
sexual characters. 

In the following chapters, I shall treat of the 
secondary sexual characters in animals of all classes, 
and shall endeavour in each case to apply the principles 
explained in the present chapter. The lowest classes 
will detain us for a very short time, but the higher 
animals, especially birds, must be treated at consider- 
able length. It should be borne in mind that for 
reasons already assigned, I intend to give only a few 
illustrative instances of the innumerable structures by 
the aid of which the male finds the female, or, when 
found, holds her. On the other hand, all structures 


874 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II 


and instincts by the aid of which the male conquers 
other males, and by which he allures or excites the 
female, will be fully discussed, as these are in many 
ways the most interesting. 

Supplement on the proportional numbers of the two sexes 
in animals belonging to various classes. 

As no one, as far as I can discover, has paid atten- 
tion to the relative numbers of the two sexes through- 
out the animal kingdom, I will here give such materials 
as I have been able to collect, although’ they are 
extremely imperfect. They consist in only a few 
instances of actual enumeration, and the numbers are 
not very large. As the proportions are known with 
certainty only in mankind, I will first give them as a 
standard of comparison. 

Man. — In England during ten years (from 1857 to 
1866) the average number of children born alive yearly 
was 707,120, in the proportion of 104*5 males to 100 
females. But in 1857 the male births throughout 
England were as 105*2, and in 1865 as 104 0 to 100. 
Looking to separate districts, in Buckinghamshire 
(where about 5000 children are annually born) the mean 
proportion of male to female births, during the whole 
period of the above ten years, was as 102 8 to 100 ; 
whilst in N. Wales (where the average annual hirths 
are 12,873) it was as high as 106*2 to 100. Taking a 
still smaller district, viz., Eutlandshire (where the 
annual births average only 739), in 1864 the male 
births were as 114*6, and in 1862 as only 97*0 to 100; 
but even in this small district the average of the 7385 
births during the whole ten years, was as 104*5 to 100 ; 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


375 


that is in the same ratio as throughout England/® 
The proportions are sometimes slightly disturbed by 
unknown causes; thus Prof. Faye states that in some 
districts of Norway there has been during a decennial 
“ period a steady deficiency of boys, whilst in others 
the opposite condition has existed.” In France 
during forty-four years the male to the female births 
have been as 106*2 to 100 ; but during this period it 
has occurred five times in one department, and six times 
in another, that the female births have exceeded the 
males. In Kussia the average proportion is as high as 
108 9, and in Philadelphia in the United States as 110*5 
to 100.'*^ The average for Europe, deduced by Bickes 
from about seventy million births, is 106 males to 100 
females. On the other hand, with white children born 
at the Cape of Good Hope, the proportion of males is so 
low as to fluctuate during successive years between 90 
and 99 males for every 100 females. It is a singular 
fact that with Jews the proportion of male births is 
decidedly larger than with Christians : thus in Prussia 
the proportion is as 113, in Breslau as 114, and in 
Livonia as 120 to 100 ; the Christian births in these 
countries being the same as usual, for instance, in 
Livonia as 104 to 100.^° 


‘Twenty-ninth Annual Re- 
port of the R< gititrar-General for 
186(i.’ In this report (p. xii.) 
a special decennial table is 
given. 

For Norway and Russia, 
see abstract of Prof. Faye’s re- 
searches, in ‘ British and Foreign 
Medico-Chirurg. Review,’ Apnl, 
1867, pp. 343, 345. For France, 
the ‘ Annuaire pour I’An 1867,’ 
p. 213. For Philadelphia, Dr. 


Stockton Hough, ‘ Social Science 
Assoc.’ 1874. For the Cape of 
Good Hope, Quetelet as quoted 
by Dr. H. H. Zouteveen, in the 
Dutch Translation of this work 
(vol. i. p. 417), where much in- 
formation is given on the pro- 
portion of the sexes. 

In regard to the Jews, see 
M. Thury, ‘La Loi de Produc- 
tion des Sexes,’ 1863, p. 25. 


376 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. . 


Part II. 


Prof. Faye remarks that “ a still greater preponder- 
“ ance of males would be met with, if death struck both 
“ sexes in equal proportion in the womb and during 
“ birth. But the fact is, that for every 100 still-born 
“females, we have in several countries from 134*6 to 
“ 144'9 still-born males. During the first four or five 
“ years of life, also, more male children die than females, 
“ for example in England, during the first year, 126 
“ hoys die for every 100 girls — a proportion which in 
“ France is still more unfavourable.”®^ Dr. Stockton- 
Hough accounts for these facts in part by the more 
frequent defective development of males than of females. 
We have before seen that the male sex is more 
variable in structure than the female ; and variations 
in important organs would generally be injurious 
But the size of the body, and especially of the head, 
being greater in male than female infants is another 
cause : for the males are thus more liable to be injured 
during parturition. Consequently the still-born males 
are more numerous ; and, as a highly competent judge. 
Dr. Crichton Browne,®^ believes, male infants often 


‘ British and Foreign Me- 
dico-Chirurg. Keview,’ April, 
1867, p. 343. Dr. Stark also 
remarks (‘Tenth Annual Re- 
port of Births, Deaths, &c., in 
Scotland,’ 1867, p. xxviii.) that 
“ These examples may suffice to 
“show that, at almost every 
“stage of life, the males in 
“ Scotland have a greater lia- 
“ bility to death and a higher 
“death-rate than the females. 
“ The fact, however, of this 
“ peculiarity being most strongly 
“developed at that infantile 
“ period of life when the dress, 
“ iood, and general treatment of 


“ both sexes are alike, seems to 
“ prove that the higher male 
“ death-rate is an impressed, 
“ natural, and constitutional 
“ peculiarity due to sex alone.” 
‘West Riding Lunatic 
Asylum Reports,’ vol. i. 1871, 
p. 8. Sir J. Simpson has proved 
that the head ol the male infant 
exceeds that of the female by 
3-8ths of an inch in circumfer- 
ence, and by l-8th in transverse 
diameter. Quetelet has shown 
that woman is born smaller than 
man ; see Dr. Duncan, ‘ Fecun- 
dity, Fertility, Sterility,’ 1871, 
p. 382. 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


377 


suffer in health for some years after birth. Owing to 
this excess in the death-rate of male children, both 
at birth and for some time subsequently, and owing to 
the exposure of grown men to various dangers, and to 
their tendency to emigrate, the females in all old- 
settled countries, where statistical records have been 
kept,®^ are found to preponderate considerably over 
the males. 

It seems at first sight a mysterious fact that in 
different nations, under different conditions and cli- 
mates, in Naples, Prussia, Westphalia, Holland, France, 
England and the United States, the excess of male over 
female births is less when they are illegitimate than 
when legitimate.®^ This has been explained by 
different writers in many different ways, as from the 
mothers being generally young, from the large pro- 
portion of first pregnancies, &c. But we have seen 
that male infants, from the large size of their heads, 
suffer more than female infants during parturition ; 
and as the mothers of illegitimate children must be 
more liable than other women to undergo bad labours, 
from various causes, such as attempts at concealment 
by tight lacing, hard work, distress of mind, &c., their 
male infants would proportionably suffer. And this 
probably is the most efficient of all the causes of the 
proportion of males to females born alive being less 
amongst illegitimate children than amongst the legiti- 
mate. With most animals the greater size of the adult 

“ With the savage Guaranys “ Babbage, ‘ Edinburgh Jour- 
of Paraguay, according to the nal of ^Science,’ 1829, vol. i. p. 
accurate A zara (‘ Voyages dans 88; also p. 90, on still-born 
I’Am^rique merid.’ tom. ii. 1809, children. On illegitimate child- 
p. 60, 179), the woiuen are to ren in England, see ‘Report of 
the men in the proportion of 14 Registrar-General for 1866 * 
to 13. p. XV. ’ 


378 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


male than of the female, is due to the stronger males 
having conquered the weaker in their struggles for the 
possession of the females, and no doubt it is owing to 
this fact that the two sexes of at least some animals 
differ in size at birth. Thus we have the curious fact 
that we may attribute the more frequent deaths of 
male than female infants, especially amongst the ille- 
gitimate, at least in part to sexual selection. 

It has often been supposed that the relative age of 
the two parents determines the sex of the offspring ; 
and Prof. Leuckart^® has advanced what he considers 
sufficient evidence, with respect to man and certain 
domesticated animals, that this is one important 
though not the sole factor in the result. So again the 
period of impregnation relatively to the state of the 
female has been thought by some to be the efficient 
cause ; but recent observations discountenance this 
belief. According to Dr. Stockton-Hough,'^® the season 
of the year, the poverty or wealth of the parents, 
residence in the country or in cities, the crossing of 
foreign immigrants, &c., all influence the proportion 
of the sexes. With mankind, polygamy has also 
been supposed to lead to the birth of a greater pro- 
portion of female infants ; but Dr. J. Campbell care- 
fully attended to this subject in the harems of Siam, and 
concludes that the proportion of male to female births 
is the same as from monogamous unions. Hardly any 
animal has been rendered so highly polygamous as the 
English race-horse, and we shall immediately see that 
his male and female offspring are almost exactly equal 

“ Leuckart, in Wagner Philadelphia, 1874. 

‘ Handworterbuch der Phys.’ B. ‘Anthropological Review,’ 

iv. 1853, 8. 774. April, 1870, p. cviii. 

“ Social Science Assoc, of 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


379 


in number. I will now give the facts which I have 
collected with respect to the proportional numbers of 
the sexes of various animals; and will then briefly 
discuss how far selection has come into play in de- 
termining the result. 

Horses. — Mr. Tegetmeier has been so kind as to tabulate for me 
from the ‘ Racing Calendar ’ the births of race-horses during a period 
of twenty-one years, viz., from 1846 to 1867 ; 1849 being omitted, 
as no returns were that year published. The total births were 
25,560,®* consisting of 12,763 males and 12,797 females, or in the 
proportion of 99*7 males to 100 females. As these numbers are 
tolerably large, and as they are drawn from all parts of England, 
during several years, we may with much confidence conclude that 
with the domestic horse, or at least with the race- horse, the two 
sexes are produced in almost equal numbers. The fluctuations in 
the proportions during successive years are closely like those which 
occur with mankind, when a small and thinly-populated area is 
considered ; thus in 1856 the male horses were as 107*1, and in 
1867 as only 92*6 to 100 females. In the tabulated returns the 
proportions vary in cycles, for the males exceeded the females 
during six successive years ; and the females exceeded the males 
during two periods each of four years : this, however, may be 
accidental ; at least I can detect nothing of the kind with man in 
the decennial table in the Registrar’s Report for 1866. 

Dogs . — During a period of twelve years, from 1857 to 1868, the 
births of a large number of greyhounds, throughout England, were 
sent to the ‘ Field ’ newspaper ; and I am again indebted to Mr. 
Tegetmeier for carefully tabulating the results. The recorded births 
were 6878, consisting of 3605 males and 3273 females, that is, in 


®* During eleven years a re- 
cord was kept of the number of 
mares which proved barren or 
prematurely slipped their foals ; 
and it deserves notice, as shew- 
ing how infertile these highly - 
nurtured and rather closely- 
interbred animals have become, 
that not far from one-third of 


the mares failed to produce 
living foals. Thus during 1866, 
809 male colts and 816 female 
colts were born, and 743 mares 
failed to produce offspring. 
During 1867, 836 males and 
902 females were bom, and 
794 mares failed. 


380 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


the proportion of 110*1 males to 100 females. The greatest fluctua- 
tions occurred in 1864, when the proportion was as 95*3 males, and 
in 1867, as 116*3 males to 100 females. The above average pro- 
portion of 110*1 to 100 is probably nearly correct in the case of the 
greyhound, but whether it would hold with other domesticated 
breeds is in some degree doubtful. Mr. Guppies has enquired from 
several great breeders of dogs, and finds that all without exception 
believe that females are produced in excess ; but he suggests that 
this belief may have arisen from females being less valued, and 
from the consequent disappointment producing a stronger im- 
pression on the mind. 

Sheep . — The sexes of sheep are not ascertained by agriculturists 
until several months after birth, at the period when the males are 
castrated ; so that the following returns do not give the proportions 
at birth. Moreover, I find that several great breeders in Scotland, 
who annually raise some thousand sheep, are firmly convinced that 
a larger proportion of males than of females die during the first year 
or two. Therefore the proportion of males would be somewhat 
larger at birth than at the age of castration. This is a remarkable 
coincidence with what, as we have seen, occurs with mankind, and 
both cases probably depend on the same cause. I have received 
returns from four gentlemen in England who have bred Lowland 
sheep, chiefly Leicestcrs, during the last ten to sixteen years ; they 
amount altogether to 8965 births, consisting of 4407 males and 4558 
females ; that is in the proportion of 96*7 males to 100 females. 
With respect to Cheviot and black- faced sheep bred in Scotland, I 
have received returns from six breeders, two of them on a large 
scale, chiefly for the years 1867-1869, but some of the returns 
extend back to 1862. The total number recorded amounts to 
50,685, consisting of 25,071 males and 25,614 females, or in the 
proportion of 97*9 males to 100 females. If we take the English 
and Scotch returns together, the total number amounts to 59,650, 
consisting of 29,478 males and 30,172 females, or as 97*7 to 100. 
So that with sheep at the age of castration the females are certainly 
in excess of the males, but probably this would not hold good at 
birth.“ 


I am much indebted to 
Mr. Guppies for having pro- 
cured for me the above returns 
from Scotland, as well as some 
of the following returns on 


cattle. Mr. R. Elliot, of Laigh- 
wood, first called my attention 
to the premature deaths of the 
males, — a statement subsequent- 
ly confirmed by Mr. Altchisop 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


381 


Of Cattle I have received returns from nine gentlemen of 982 
births, too few to be trusted ; these consisted of 477 bull-calves and 
505 cow-calves ; i.e., in the proportion of 94'4 males to 100 females. 
The Rev. W. D. Fox informs me that in 1867 out of 34 calves 
born on a farm in Derbyshire only one was a bull. Mr. Harrison 
Weir has enquired from several breeders of Pigs^ and most of them 
estimate the male to the female births as about 7 to 6. This same 
gentleman has bred Pabhits for many years, and has noticed that a 
far greater number of bucks are produced than does. But estima- 
tions are of little value. 

Of mammalia in a state of nature I have been able to learn very 
little. In regard to the common rat, I have received conflicting 
statements. Mr. R. Elliot, of Laighwood, informs me that a rat- 
catcher assured him that he had always found the males in great 
excess, even with the young in the nest. In consequence of this, 
Mr. Elliot himself subsequently examined some hundred old ones, 
and found the statement true. Mr. F. Buckland has bred a large 
number of white rats, and he also believes that the males greatly 
“ exceed the females. In regard to Moles, it is said that “ the males 
“ are much more numerous than the females ; ” and as the catching 
of these animals is a special occupation, the statement may perhaps 
be trusted. Sir A. Smith, in describing an antelope of S. Africa 
(Kohus elUpsiprymnus), remarks, that in the herds of this and other 
species, the males are few in number compared with the females : 
the natives believe that they are born in this proportion ; others 
believe that the younger males are expelled from the herds, and Sir 
A. Smith says, that though he has himself never seen herds con- 
sisting of young male« alone, others affirm that this does occur. It 
appears probable that the young when expelled from the herd, would 
often fall a prey to the many beasts of prey of the country. 

BIRDS. 

With respect ^to the Fowly I have received only one account, 
namely, that out of 1001 chickens of a highly-bred stock of Cochins, 
reared during eight years by Mr. Stretch, 487 proved males and 


and others. To this latter Bell, ‘History of British 

gentleman, and to Mr. Payan, Quadrupeds,’ p. 100. 

I owe my thanks for large ‘Illustrations of the Zoo- 

retums as to sheep. logy of S. Africa,’ 1849, pi. 29. 


382 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


614 females ; i.e., as 94*7 to 100. In re^jard to domestic pigeoni 
there is good evidence either that the males are produced in excess, 
or that they live longer ; for these birds invariably pair, and single 
males, as Mr. Tegetmeier informs me, can always be purchased 
cheaper than females. Usually the two birds reared from the two 
eggs laid in the same nest are a male and a female ; but Mr. Harri- 
son Weir, who has been so large a breeder, says that he has often 
bred two cocks from the same nest, and seldom two hens ; more- 
over, the hen is generally the weaker of the two, and more liable to 
perish. 

With respect to birds in a state of nature, Mr. Gould and others®^ 
are convinced that the males are generally the more numerous ; and 
as the young males of many species resemble the females, the latter 
would naturally appear to be the more numerous. Large numbers 
of pheasants are reared by Mr. Baker of Leadenhall from eggs laid 
by wild bii’ds, and he informs Mr. Jenner Weir that four or five 
males to one female are generally produced. An experienced 
observer remarks,®* that in Scandinavia the broods of the capercailzie 
and black-cock contain more males than females ; and that with 
the Dal-ripa (a kind of ptarmigan) more males than females attend 
the lehs or places of courtship; but this latter circumstance is 
accounted for by some observers by a greater number of hen birds 
being killed by vermin. From various facts given by White of 
Selborne,** it seems clear that the males of the partridge must be 
in considerable excess in the south of England ; and I have been 
assured that this is the case in Scotland. Mr. Weir on enquiring 
from the dealers, who receive at certain seasons large numbers of 
ruffs (MacJietes pugnax\ was told that the males are much the more 
numerous. This same naturalist has also enquired for me from 
the birdcatchers, who annually catch an astonishing number of 
various small species alive for the London market, and he was un- 
hesitatingly answered by an old and trustworthy man, that with 
the chaffinch the males are in large excess ; he thought as high as 
2 males to 1 female, or at least as high as 5 to 3.*® The males 


Brehm (‘Illust. Thierle- 
ben,’ B. iv. s. 990) comes to the 
same conclusion. 

®* On the authority of L. 
Lloyd, ‘ Game Birds of Sweden,’ 
1867, pp. 12, 132. 


‘ Nat. Hist, of Selborne,’ 
letter xiii. edit, of 1826, vol. i. 
p. 139. 

Mr. Jenner Weir received 
similar information, on making 
enquiries during the following 


CuAP. VUI. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


383 


of the blackbird, he likewise maintained, were by far the more 
numerous, whether caught by traps or by netting at night. These 
statements may apparently be trusted, because this same man said 
that the sexes are about equal with the lark, the twite (Linaria 
montana)^ and goldfinch. On the other hand, he is certain that 
with the common linnet, the females preponderate greatly, but 
unequally during different years ; during some years he has found 
the females to the males as four to one. It should, however, be 
borne in mind, that the chief season for catching birds does not 
begin till September, so that with some species partial migrations 
may have begun, and the flocks at this period often consist of hens 
alone. Mr. Salvin paid particular attention to the sexes of the 
humming-birds in Central America, and he is convinced that with 
most of the species the males are in excess ; thus one year he pro- 
cured 204 specimens belonging to ten species, and these consisted 
of 166 males and of only 38 females. With two other species 
the females were in excess: but the proportions apparently vary 
either during different seasons or in different localities; for on 
one occasion the males of Campylopterus hemileucurus were to the 
females as 5 to 2, and on another occasion®® in exactly the reversed 
ratio. As beariug on this latter point, I may add, that Mr. Powys 
found in Corfu and Epirus the sexes of the chafiSnch keeping apart, 
and “ the females by far the most numerous ; ” whilst in Palestine 
Mr. Tristram found “ the male flocks appearing greatly to exceed 
“ the female in number.” ®'^ So again with the Quiscalas major y Mr. 
Gr. Taylor ®* says, that in Florida there were “ very few females in 
“ proportion to the males,” whilst in Honduras the proportion was 
the other way, the species there having the character of a polygamist. 


year. To shew the number of 
living chafiinches caught, I may 
mention that in 1869 there was 
a match between two experts, 
and one man caught in a day 
62, and another 40, male chaf^ 
finches. The greatest number 
ever caught by one man in a 
single day was 70. 


®® ‘Ibis,’ vol. ii. p. 260, as 
quoted in Gould’s ‘ Trochilidas,’ 
1861, p. 52. For the foregoing 
proportions, I am indebted to 
Mr. Salvin for a table of his 
results. 

®T ‘Ibis,’ 1860, p. 137; and 
1867, p. 369. 

‘Ibis,’ 1862, p. 187. 


384 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


FIS FI. 

With Fish the proportional numbers of the sexes can be 
ascertained only by catching them in the adult or nearly adult 
s state; and there are many difficulties in arriving at any just 
conclusion.®® Infertile females might readily be mistaken for 
males, as Dr. Gunther has remarked to me in regard to trout 
With some species the males are believed to die soon after fertilising 
the ova. With many species the males are of much smaller size 
than the females, so that a large number of males would escape 
from the same net by which the females were caught. M. 
Carbonnier,'^® who has especially attended to the natural history 
of the pike {Esox lucius), states that many males, ovdng to their 
small size, are devoured by the larger females ; and he believes 
that the males of almost all fish are exposed from this same cause 
to greater danger than the females. Nevertheless, in the few cases 
in which the proportional numbers have been actually observed, 
the males appear to be largely in excess. Thus Mr. R. Buist, the 
superintendent of the Stormontfield experiments, says that in 
1865, out of 70 salmon first landed for the purpose of obtaining the 
ova, upwards of 60 were males. In 1867 he again “ calls attention 
“ to the vast disproportion of the males to the females. We had at 
“ the outset at least ten males to one female.” Afterwards females 
sufficient for obtaining ova were procured. He adds, “ from the 
“ great proportion of the males, they are constantly fighting and 
“ tearing each other on the spawning-beds.” This disproportion, 
no doubt, can be accounted for in part, but whether whoUy is 
doubtful, by the males ascending the rivers before the females. 
Mr. F. Buckland remarks in regard to trout, that “ it is a curious 
“ fact that the males preponderate very largely in number over the 
“ females. It invariably happens that when the first rush of fish 
“ is made to the net, there will be at least seven or eight males to 
“ one female found captive. I cannot quite account for this ; 
“either the males are more numerous than the females, or the 


®® Leuckart quotes Bloch 
(Wagner, ‘ Handworterbuch der 
Phys.,’ B. iv. 1853, s. 775), that 
with fish there are twice as 
many males as females. 

Quoted in the ‘ Farmer,’ 


March 18, 1869, p. 369. 

‘ The Stormontfield Pisci- 
cultural Experiments,’ 1866, p. 
23. The ‘ Field ’ newspaper, 
June 29th, 1867. 


Ctiap. vttt. proportion of the sexes. 


385 


“ latter seek safety by concealment rather than flight.” He then 
adds, that by carefully searching the banks sufficient females for 
obtaining ova can be found.'^^ Mr. H. Lee informs me that out of 
212 trout, taken for this purpose in Lord Portsmouth’s park, 150 
were males and 62 females. 

The males of the Cyprinidae likewise seem to be in excess ; but 
several members of this Family, viz., the carp, tench, bream and 
minnow, appear regularly to follow the practice, rare in the animal 
kingdom, of polyandry ; for the female whilst spawning is always 
attended by two males, one on each side, and in the case of the 
bream by three or four males. This fact is so well known, that it 
is always recommended to stock a pond with two male tenches to 
one female, or at least with three males to two females. With the 
minnow, an excellent observer states, that on the spawning-beds 
the males are ten times as numerous as the females ; when a 
female comes amongst the males, “she is immediately pressed 
“ closely by a male on each side ; and when they have been in that 
“ situation for a time, are superseded by other two males.” 

INS LOTS. 

In this great Class, the Lepidoptera almost alone afford means 
for judging of the proportional numbers of the sexes; for they have 
been collected with special care by many good observers, and have 
been largely bred from the egg or caterpillar state. I had hoped 
that some breeders of silk-moths might have kept an exact record, 
but after writing to France and Italy, and consulting various 
treatises, I cannot find that this has ever been done. The general 
o['inion appears to be that the sexes are nearly equal, but in Italy, 
as I hear from Professor Canestrini, many breeders are convinced 
that the females are produced in excess. This same naturalist, 
however, informs me, that in the two yearly broods of the 
Ailanthus silk-moth {Bomhyx cynthia)^ the males greatly prepon- 
derate in the first, whilst in the second the two sexes are nearly 
equal, or the females rather in excess. * • 

In regard to Butterflies in a state of nature, several observers 


‘ Land and Water,’ 1868, 
1*. 41. 

Yarrell, * Hist. British 
Fishes,’ vol. i. 1826, p. 307 ; on 
the Cyprinus cMrpio, p. 331 ; on 


the Tinea vulgaris^ p. 331 ; on 
the Abramis bramaf p. 336. 
See, for the minnow (Leuciscus 
pliDxinus), ‘ London’s Mag. of 
Nat. Hist.’ vol. V. 1832, p. 082. 

0 


386 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


have been much struck by the apiDarently enormous preponderance 
of the males.'^^ Thus Mr. Bates,’® in speaking of several species, 
about a hundred in number, which inhabit the Upper Amazons, 
says that the males are much more numerous than the females, 
s even in the proportion of a hundred to one. In North America, 
Edwards, wh.o had great experience, estimates in the genus Papilio 
the males to the females as four to one; and Mr. Walsh, who 
informed me of this statement, says that with P. turnus this is 
certainly the case. In South Africa, Mr. E. Trimen found the 
males in excess in 19 species ; and in one of these, which swarms 
in open places, he estimated the number of males as fifty to one 
female. With another species, in which the males are numerous in 
certain localities, he collected only five females during seven years. 
In the island of Bourbon, M. Maillard states that the males of one 
species of Papilio are twenty times as numerous as the females.” 
Mr. Trimen informs me that as far as he has himself seen, or heard 
from others, it is rare for the females of any butterfly to exceed the 
males in number ; but three South African species perhaps offer an 
exception. Mr. Wallace’® states that the females of Ornithoptera 
crcesus, in the Malay archipelago, are more common and more 
easily caught than the males; but this is a rare butterfly. I may 
here add, that in Hyperythra, a genus of moths, Guen4e says, that 
from four to five females are sent in collections from India for one 
male. 

When this subject of the proportional numbers of the sexes of 
insects was brought before the Entomological Society,’® it was 
generally admitted that the males of most Lepidopiera, in the 
adult or imago state, are caught in greater numbers than the females : 
but this fact was attributed by various observers to the more 
retiring habits of the females, and to the males emerging earlier 
from the cocoon. This latter circumstance is well known to occur 


Leuckart quotes Meinecke 
(Wagner, ‘ Handw.orterbuch der 
Phys.’ B. iv. 1853, s. 775) that 
the males of Butterflies are three 
or four times as numerous as 
the females. 

‘The Naturalist on the 
Amazons,’ vol. ii. 1863, p. 228, 
347. 

’® Four of these cf^ses are 


given by Mr. Trimen in his 
‘ Ehopalocera Africas Australis.’ 
” Quoted by IVimen, ‘ Trans- 
act. Eut. Soc.’ vol. V. part iv. 
1866, p. 330. 

’® ‘Transact. Linn. Soc.’ vol. 
XXV. p. 37. 

’® ‘ Proc. Entomolog, Soc/ 
Feb. 17th, 1868, 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


387 


with most Lepidoptera, as well as with other insects. So that, as 
M. Personnat remarks, the males of the domesticated Bombyx 
Yamamai, are useless at the beginning of the season, and the 
females at the end, from the want of mates.®® I cannot, however, 
persuade myself that these causes suffice to explain the great excess 
of males, in the above cases of certain butterflies which are 
extremely common in their native countries. Mr. Stainton, who 
has paid very close attention during many years to the smaller 
moths, informs me that when he collected them in the imago state, 
he thought that the males were ten times as numerous as the 
females, but that since he has reared them on a large scale from 
the caterpillar state, he is convinced that the females are the more 
numerous. Several entomologist^^ concur in this view. Mr. 
Doubleday, however, and some others, take an opposite view, and 
are convinced that they have reared from the eggs and caterpillars 
a larger proportion of males than of females. 

Besides the more active habits of the males, their earlier 
emergence from the cocoon, and in some cases their frequenting 
more open stations, other causes may be assigned for an apparent 
or real difierence in the proportional numbers of the sexes of 
Lepidoptera, when captured in the imago state, and when reared 
from the egg or caterpillar state. I hear from Professor Canestrini, 
that it is believed by many breeders in Italy, that the female 
caterpillar of the silk-moth suffers more from the recent disease 
than the male; and Dr. Staudinger informs me that in rearing 
Lepidoptera more females die in the cocoon than males. With 
many species the female caterpillar is larger than the male, and a 
collector would naturally choose the finest specimens, and thus 
unintentionally collect a larger number of females. Three collectors 
have told me that this was their practice; but Dr. Wallace is sure 
that most collectors take all the specimens which they can find of 
the rarer kinds, which alone are worth the trouble of rearing. 
Birds when surrounded by caterpillars would probably devour the 
largest; and Professor Canestrini informs me that in Italy some 
breeders believe, though on insufficient evidence, that in the first 
broods of the Ailanthus silk-moth, the wasps destroy a larger 
number of the female than of the male caterpillars. Dr. Wallace 
further remarks that female caterpillars, from being larger than the 


Quoted by Dr. Wallace in ‘ Proc, Ent. Soc.’ 3rd series, vol. y, 
J867, p. 487, 


388 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


males, require more time for their development, nnd consume more 
food and moisture ; and thus they would be exposed uuring a 
longer time to danger from ichneumons, birds, &c., and in times of 
scarcity would perish in greater numbers. Hence it appears quite 
possible that in a state of nature, fewer female Lepidoptera may 
reach maturity than males ; and for our special object we are 
concerned with their relative numbers at maturity, when the sexes 
are ready to propagate their kind. 

The manner in which the males of certain moths congregate in 
extraordinary numbers round a single female, apparently indicates a 
great excess of males, though this fact may perhaps be accounted 
for by the earlier emergence of the males from their cocoons. Mr. 
Stainton informs me that from twelve to twenty males, may often 
be seen congregated round a female Elachista rufocmerea. It is 
well known that if a virgin Lasiocampa q^uercusov Snturnia carpini 
be exposed in a cage, vast numbers of males collect round her, and 
if confined in a room will even come down the chimney to her. 
Mr. Doubleday believes that he has seen from fifly to a hundred 
males of both these s[ ecies attracted in the course of a single day 
by a female in confinement. In the Isle of Wight Mr. Trimen 
exposed a box in which a female of the Lasiocampa had been 
confined on the previous day, and five males soon endeavoured to 
gain admittance. In Australia, M. Verreaux, having placed the 
female of a small Bombyx in a box in his pocket, was followed by 
a crowd of males, so that about 200 entered the house with him.®^ 

Mr. Doublcday has called my attention to M. Staudinger’s list 
of Lepid( -ptera, which gives the prices of the males and females of 
300 species or well-marked varieties of butterflies (Rhopalocera). 
The prices for both sexes of the very common species are of course 
the same; but in 114 of the rarer species they differ; the males 
being in all cases, excepting one, the cheaper. On an average of 
the prices of the 113 species, the price of the male to that of the 
female is as 100 to 149 ; and this apparently indicates that 
inversely the males exceed the females in the same proportion. 
About 2000 species or varieties of moths (Heterocera) are 
catalogued, those with wingless females being liere excluded on 
account of the difference in habits between the two sexes : of these 


Blanchard, ‘Metamorphoses, ^ ‘ Lepidopteren - Doubletten 

Moeurs des Insectes,’ 1868, pp. Liste,’ Berlin, No. x. 1866, 
325-226, 


Chap. VIII. PEOPORTIOK OF THF SEXFS. 


889 


2000 species, 141 differ in price according to sex, the males of 130 
being cheaper, and those of only 11 being dearer than the females. 
The average price of the males of the 130 species, to that of the 
females, is as 100 to 143. With respect to the butterflies in this 
priced list, Mr. Doubleday thinks (and no man in England has had 
more experience), that there is nothing in the habits of the species 
which can account for the difference in the prices of the two sexes, 
and that it can be accounted for only by an excess in the number 
of the males. But I am bound to add that Dr. Staudinger informs 
me, that he is himself of a different opinion. He thinks that the 
less active habits of the females and the earlier emergence of the 
males will account for his collectors securing a larger number of 
males than of females, and consequently for the lower prices of the 
former. With respect to specimens reared from the caterpillar- 
state, Dr. Staudinger believes, as previously stated, that a greater 
number of females than of males die whilst confined in the 
cocoons. He adds that with certain species one sex seems to pre- 
ponderate over the other during certain years. 

Of direct observations on the sexes of Lepidoptera, reared either 
from eggs or caterpillars, I have received only the few following 
cases : — 


The Rev. J. Helliiis®^ of Exeter reared, during 1868, 
images of 73 species, which consisted of . 

IMr. Albert Jones of Eltham reared, during 1868,1 
images of 9 species, which consisted of . . / 

During 1869 he reared images from 4 species,! 

consisting of / 

Mr. Buckler of Emsworth, Hants, during 1869,1 
reared images from 74 species, consisting of ./ 
Dr. Wallace of Colchester reared from one broodl 

of Bombyx cynthia / 

Dr. Wallace raised, from cocoons of Bombyx Pernyil 

sent from China, during 1869 / 

Dr. Wallace raised, during 1868 and 1869, froml j 
two lots of cocoons of Bombyx yama-mai . . / 

Total 


Males. 

Females. 

153 

137 

159 

126 

114 

112 

180 

169 

52 

48 

224 

123 

52 

46 

934 

761 


^ This naturalist has been so from former years, in which the 
kiud as to send me some results females seemed to preponderate ; 


390 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


So that in these eight lots of cocoons and eggs, males were 
produced in excess. Taken together the proportion of males is as 
122*7 to 100 females. But the numbers are hardly large enough 
to be trustworthy. 

On the whole, from these various sources of evidence, all pointing 
in the same direction, I infer that with most species of Lepidoptera, 
the mature males generally exceed the females in number, whatever 
the proportions may be at their first emergence from the egg. 

With reference to the other Orders of insects, I have been able 
to collect very little reliable information. With the stag-beetle 
(Lucanus cervus) “ the males appear to be much more numerous 
“ than the females ; ” but when, as Cornelius remarked during 1867, 
an unusual number of these beetles appeared in one part of 
Germany, the females appeared to exceed the males as six to one. 
With one of the Elateridae, the males are said to be much more 
numerous than the females, and “ two or three are often found 
“united with one female;®^ so that here polyandry seems to 
“prevail.” With Siagonium (Staphylinidae), in which the males 
are furnished with horns, “ the females are far more numerous than 
“ the opposite sex.” Mr. Janson stated at the Entomological 
Society that the females of the bark-feeding Tomicus villosiis are so 
common as to be a plague, whilst the males are so rare as to be 
hardly known. 

It is hardly worth while saying anything about the proportion of 
the sexes in. certain species and even groups of insects, for the 
males are unknown or very rare, and the females are partheno- 
genetic, that is, fertile without sexual union ; examples of this are 
afforded by several of the Cynipidse.®® In all the gall-making 
Cynipidae known to Mr. Walsh, the females are four or five times 
as numerous as the males ; and so it is, as he informs me, with the 
gall-making Cecidomyiidae (Diptera). With some common species 
of Saw-flies (Tenthredinae) Mr. F. Smith has reared hundreds of 
specimens from larvae of ail sizes, but has never reared a single 


but so many of the figures were 
estimates, that I found it im- 
possible to tabulate them. 

** Gunther’s ‘ hecord of Zoo- 
logical Literature,’ 1867, p. 260. 
On the excess of female Lucanus, 
ibid. p. 250. On the males of 
Lucanus in England, ‘ West- 


wood, ‘ ]\Iodern Class of Insects,’ 
vol. i. p. 187. On the Siago- 
nium, ibid. p. 172. 

®® Walsh, in ‘ The American 
Entomologist,’ vol. i. 1869, p. 
103. F. Smith, ‘ Record cf 
Zoological Literature,’ 1867, p. 
328. 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


391 


male: on the other hand, Curtis says,®® that with certain species 
(Athalia), bred by him, the males were to the females as six to 
one ; whilst exactly the reverse occurred with the mature insects of 
the same species caught in the fields. In the family of Bees, 
Hermann Miiller,®^ collected a large number of specimens of many 
species, and reared others from the cocoons, and counted the sexes. 
He found that the males of some species greatly exceeded the 
females in number ; in others the reverse occurred ; and in others 
the two sexes were nearly equal. But as in most cases the males 
emerge from the cocoons before the females, they are at 1he 
commencement of the breeding season practically in excess. 
Muller also observed that the relative number of the two sexes in 
some species differed much in different localities. But as H. 
Muller has himself remarked to me, these remarks must be 
received with some caution, as one sex might more easily escape 
observation than the other. Thus his brother Fritz Muller has 
noticed in Brazil that the two sexes of the same species of bee 
sometimes frequent different kinds of flowers. With respect to the 
Orthoptera, I know hardly anything about the relative number of 
the sexes: Korte,®® however, says that out of 600 locusts which he 
examined, the males were to the females as five to six. With the 
Neuroptera, Mr. Walsh states that in many, but by no means in 
all the species of the Odonatous group, there is a great overplus of 
males: in the genus Hetajrina, also, the males are generally at 
least four times as numerous as the females. In certain species in 
the genus Gomphus the males are equally in excess, whilst in two 
other species, the females are twice or thrice as numerous as the 
males. In some European species of Psocus thousands of females 
may be collected without a single male, whilst with other species 
of the same genus both sexes are common.®® In England, Mr. 
MacLachlan has captured hundreds of the female Apatania 
muliehrisj but has never seen the male ; and of Boreus hyemalis 
only four or five males have been seen here.®® With most of these 


‘ Farm Insects,’ pp. 45-46. 
^ ‘ Anwendung der Darwin- 
schen Lehre Verb. d. n. V. 
Jahrg. xxiv.’ 

®® ‘ Die Strich, Zug oder Wan- 
derheuschrecke,’ 1828, p. 20. 

*® ‘ Obs( rvations on N. Ameri- 


can Neuroptera,’ by H. Hagen 
and B. D. Walsh, ‘ Proc. Ent. 
Soc. Philadelphia,’ Oct. 1863, 
pp. 168, 223, 239. 

®° ‘Proc. Ent. Soc. London,' 
Feb. 17, 1868. 


392 


THE DESCENT OF MAN, Part II. 


species (excepting the Tenthrediua^) there is at present no evidence 
that the females are subject to parthenogenesis; and thus we see 
how ignorant we are of the causes of the apparent discrepancy in 
the proportion of the two sexes. 

In the other classes of the Articulata I liave been able to collect 
X still less information. With spiders, Mr. Black wall, who has 
carefully attended to this class during many years, writes to me 
that the males from their more erratic habits are more commonly 
seen, and therefore appear more numerous. This is actually the 
case with a few species; but he mentions several species in six 
genera, in which the females appear to be much more numerous 
than the males.®^ The small size of the males in comparison with 
the females (a peculiarity which is sometimes carried to an 
extreme degree), and their widely different appearance, may account 
in some instances for their rarity in collections.^^ 

Some of the lower Crustaceans are able to propagate their kind 
sexually, and this will account for the extreme rarity of the males ; 
thus Von Siebold®^ carefully examined no less than 13,000 
specimens of Apus from twenty-one localities, and amongst these 
he found only 319 males. With some other forms (as Tanais and 
Cypris), as Fritz Muller informs me, there is reason to believe that 
the males are much shorter-lived than the females ; and this would 
explain their scarcity, supposing the two sexes to be at first equal 
In number. On the other hand, Muller has invariably taken far 
more males than females of the Diastylidse and of Cypridina on the 
shores of Brazil: thus with a species in the latter genus, 63 
specimens caught the same day included 57 males ; but he suggests 
that this preponderance may be due to some unknown difference in 
the habits of the two sexes. With one of the higher Brazilian 
crabs, namely a Gelasimus, Fritz Muller found the males to be 
more numerous than the females. According to the large ex- 
perience of Mr. 0. Spence Bate, the reverse seems to be the case 
with six common British crabs, the names of which he has 
given me. 


Another great authority 
with respect to this class, Prof. 
Thorell of Ups.ila (‘On Euro- 
pean Spiders,’ 1869-70, part i. 
p. 205), speaks as if female 
spiders were generally commoner 
than the males. 


See, on this subject, Mr. 
0. P. Cambridge, as quoted in 
‘ Quarterly Journal of Science,’ 
1868, p. 429. 

‘ Beitrage zur Partheno- 
genesis,’ p. 174. 


Chap. VlII. PEOPORTION OP THE SEXES. 


393 


The 'proportion of the sexes in relation to natural 
selection. 

There is reason to suspect that in some cases man 
has by selection indirectly influenced his own sex- 
producing powers. Certain, women tend to produce 
during their whole lives more children of one sex than 
of the other: and the same holds good of many 
animals, for instance, cows and horses ; thus Mr. 
Wright of Yeldersley House informs me that one of 
his Arab mares, though put seven times to different 
horses, produced seven fillies. Though I have very 
little evidence on this head, analogy would lead to the 
belief, that the tendency to produce either sex would 
be inherited like almost every other peculiarity, for 
instance, that of producing twins ; and concerning the 
above tendency a good authority, Mr. J. Downing, has 
communicated to me facts which seem to prove that 
this does occur in certain families of short-horn 
cattle. Col. Marshall has recently- found on careful 
examination that the Todas, a hill-tribe of India, 
consist of 112 males and 84 females of all ages — that 
is in a ratio of 133 *3 males to 100 females. The 
Todas, who are polyandrous in their marriages, during 
former times invariably practised female infanticide; 
but this practice has now been discontinued for a 
considerable period. Of the children born within late , 
years, the males are more numerous than the females, 
in the proportion of 124 to 100. Colonel Marshall 
accounts for this fact in the following ingenious 
manner. ‘‘ Let us for the purpose of illustration take 
“ three families as representing an average of the 
‘ 'Ihe Todas; 1873, pp. 100, 111, 194, 196. 


394 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt IL 


entire tribe ; say that one mother gives birth to six 
“ daughters and no sons ; a second mother has six 
sons only, whilst the third mother has three sons 
“ and three daughters. The first mother, following 
“ the tribal custom, destroys four daughters and 
“ preserves two. The second retains her six sons. 
“ The third kills two daughters and keeps one, as also 
“ her three sons. We have then from the three 
“ families, nine sons and three daughters, with which 
“ to continue the breed. But whilst the males belong 
“ to families in which the tendency to produce sons is 
“ great, the females are of those of a converse inclina- 
‘‘ tion. Thus the bias strengthens with each genera- 
“ tion, until, as we find, families grow to have habitually 
“ more sons than daughters.” 

That this result would follow from the above form 
of infanticide seems almost certain ; that is if we 
assume that a sex-producing tendency is inherited. 
But as the above numbers are so extremely scanty, I 
have searched for additional evidence, but cannot 
decide whether what I have found is trustworthy ; 
nevertheless the facts are, perhaps, worth giving. 
The Maories of New Zealand have long practised 
infanticide ; and Mr. Fenton states that he “ has met 
“ with instances of women who have destroyed four, 
“ six, and even seven children, mostly females. How- 
“ ever, the universal testimony of those best qualified 
“ to judge, is conclusive that this custom has for many 
‘‘ years been almost extinct. Probably the year 1835 
“ may be named as the period of its ceasing to exist.” 
Now amongst the New Zealanders, as with the Todas, 

‘ Aboriginal Inhabitants of New Zealand ; Government Report,’ 
1859, p. 36. 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 


395 


male births are considerably in excess. Mr. Fenton 
remarks (p. 30), “ One fact is certain, although the 
“ exact period of the commencement of this singular 
“ condition of the disproportion of the sexes cannot be 
“ demonstratively fixed, it is quite clear that this 
“ course of decrease was in full operation during the 
“ years 1830 to 1844, when the non- adult population 
“ of 1844 was being produced, and has continued with 
“ great energy up to the present time.” The following 
statements are taken from Mr. Fenton (p. 26), but as 
the numbers are not large, and as the census was not 
accurate, uniform results cannot be expected. It 
should be borne in mind in this and the following 
cases, that the normal state of every population is an 
excess of women, at least in all civilised countries, 
chiefly owing to the greater mortality of the male sex 
during youth, and partly to accidents of all kinds later 
in life. In 1858, the native population of New 
Zealand was estimated as consisting of 31,667 males 
and 24,303 females of all ages, that is in the ratio of 
130*3 males to 100 females. But during this same 
year, and in certain limited districts, the numbers 
were ascertained with much care, and the males of all 
ages were here 753 and the females 616; that is in 
the ratio of 122*2 males to 100 females. It is more 
important for us that during this same year of 1858, 
the non-adult males within the same district were 
found to be 178, and the non-adult females 142, that is 
in the ratio of 125*3 to 100. It may be added that in 
1844, at which period female infanticide had only 
lately ceased, the non-adult males in one district were 
281, and the non-adult females only 194, that is in the 
ratio of 144 * 8 males to 100 females. 


396 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Tart II. 


In tlie Sandwich Islands, the males exceed the 
females in number. Infanticide was formerly practised 
there to a frightful extent, but was by no means 
confined to female infants, as is shown by Mr. Ellis,®® 
and as I have been informed by Bishop Staley and the 
Kev. Mr. Coan. Nevertheless, another apparently 
trustworthy writer, Mr. Jarves,®^ whose observations 
apply to the whole archipelago, remarks: — “Numbers 
“ of women are to be found, who confess to the murder 
“ of from three to six or eight children,” and he adds, 
“ females from being considered less useful than males 
“ were more often destroyed.” From what is known 
to occur in other parts of the world, this statement is 
probable ; but must be received with much caution. 
The practice of infanticide ceased about the year 
1819, when idolatry was abolished and missionaries 
settled in the Islands. A careful census in 1839 of 
the adult and taxable men and women in the island of 
Kauai and in one district of Oahu (Jarves, p. 404), 
gives 4723 males and 3776 females; that is in the 
ratio of 125'08 to 100. At the same time the number 
of males under fourteen years in Kauai and under 
eighteen in Oahu was 1797, and of females of the same 
ages 1429 ; and here we have the ratio of 125’75 males 
to 100 females. 

In a census of all the islands in 1850,®® the males of 
all ages amount to 36,272, and the females to 33,128, 
or as 109 49 to 100. The males under seventeen years 
amounted to 10,773, and the females under the same 
age to 9593, or as 11 2-3 to 100. From the census of 

96 ‘Narrative of a Tour through This is given in the Eev. 

Hawaii,’ 1826, p. 298. H. T. Cheever’s ‘ Life in the 

< History of the Sandwich Sandwich Islands,’ 1851, p. 277. 
Islands,’ 1843, p. 93. 


Chap. VIII. PROPORTIOX OF THE SEXES. 


897 


1872, the proportion of males of all ages (including 
half-castes) to females, is as 125'36 to 100. It must 
be borne in mind that all these returns for the 
Sandwich Islands give the proportion of living males 
to living females, and not of the births; and judging 
from all civilised countries the proportion of males 
would have been considerably higher if the numbers 
had referred to births.^® 


Dr. Coulter, in describing 
(‘ Journal R. Geograph. Soc,’ 
vol. V. 1835, p. 67) the state of 
California about the year 1830, 
says that the natives, reclaimed 
by the Spanish missionaries, 
have nearly all perished, or are 
perishing, although well treated, 
not driven from their native 
land, and kept from the use of 
spirits. He attributes this, in 
great part, to the undoubted 
fact that the men greatly exceed 
the women in number ; but he 
does not know whether this is 
due to a failure of female off- 
spring, or to more females dying 
durin-j early youth. The latter 
alternative, according to all 
analogy, is very improbable. 
He adds that “ infanticide, pro- 
“ perly so called, is not common, 
“though very frequent resource 
“is had to abortion.” If Dr. 
Coulter is correct about infanti- 
cide, this case cannot be ad- 
vanced in support of Colonel 
Marshall’s view. From the 
rapid decrease of the reclaimed 
natives, we may suspect that, 
as in the cases lately given, 
their fertility has been dimin- 
ished from changed habits of 
life. 

I had hoped to gain some 
light on this subject from the 


breeding of dogs; inasmuch as 
in most breeds, with the ex- 
ception, perhaps, of greyhounds, 
many more female puppies are 
destroyed than males, just as 
with the Toda infants. Mr. 
Cupples assures me that this is 
usual with Scotch deer-hounds. 
Unfortunately, I know nothing 
of the proportion of the sexes in 
any breed, excepting greyhounds, 
and there the male births are to 
the females as llO'l to 100. 
Now from enquiries made from 
many breeders, it seems that 
the females are in some respects 
more esteemed, though other- 
wise troublesome; and it does 
not appear that the female 
puppies of the best- bred dogs 
are systematically destroyed 
more than the males, though 
this does sometimes take place 
to a limited extent. Therefore 
I am unable to decide whether 
we can, on the above principles, 
account for the preponderance of 
male births in greyhounds. On 
the other hand, we have seen 
that with horses, cattle, and 
sheep, which are too valuable for 
the young of either sex to be 
destroyed, if there is any differ- 
ence, the females are slightly ip 
excess. 


398 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt IL 


From tlie several foregoing cases we have some 
reason to believe that infanticide practised in the 
manner above explained, tends to make a male-pro- 
ducing race ; but I am far from supposing that this 
' practice in the case of man, or some analogous process 
with other species, has been the sole determining cause 
of an excess of males. There may be some unknown 
law leading to this result in decreasing races, which 
have already become somewhat infertile. Besides the 
several causes previously alluded to, the greater facility 
of parturition amongst savages, and the less consequent 
injury to their male infants, would tend to increase 
the proportion of live-born males to females. There 
does not, however, seem to he any necessary connection 
between savage life and a marked excess of males; 
that is if we may judge by the character of the scanty 
offspring of the lately existing Tasmanians and of the 
crossed offspring of the Tahitians now inhabiting 
Norfolk Island. 

As the males and females of many animals differ 
som,ewhat in habits and are exposed in different 
degrees to danger, it is probable that in many cases, 
more of one sex than of the other are habitually 
destroyed. But as far as I can trace out the complica- 
tion of causes, an indiscriminate though large de- 
struction of either sex would not tend to modify the 
sex-producing power of the species. With strictly 
social animals, such as bees or ants, which produce a 
vast number of sterile and fertile females in comparison 
with the males, and to whom this preponderance is of 
paramount importance, we can see that those com- 
munities would flourish best which contained females 
having a strong inherited tendency to produce more 


Chap. VIH. PROPOETION OF THE SEXES. 


399 


and more females ; and in such cases an unequal sex- 
producing tendency would be ultimately gained through 
natural selection. With animals living in herds or 
troops, in which the males come to the front and 
defend the herd, as with the hisons of North America 
and certain baboons, it is conceivable that a male- 
producing tendency might be gained by natural 
selection; for the individuals of the better defended 
herds would leave more numerous descendants. In the 
case of mankind the advantage arising from having a 
preponderance of men in the tribe is supposed to he 
one chief cause of the practice of female infanticide. 

In no case, as far as we can see, would an inherited 
tendency to produce both sexes in equal numbers or 
to produce one sex in excess, be a direct advantage 
or disadvantage to certain individuals more than to 
others ; for instance, an individual with a tendency to 
produce more males than females would not succeed 
better in the battle for life than an individual with an 
opposite tendency; and therefore a tendency of this 
kind could not be gained through natural selection. 
Nevertheless, there are certain animals (for instance, 
fishes and cirripedes) in which two or more males 
appear to be necessary for the fertilisation of the 
female ; and the males accordingly largely pre- 
ponderate, but it is by no means obvious how this 
male-producing tendency could have been acquired. I 
formerly thought that when a tendency to produce the 
two sexes in equal numbers was advantageous to the 
species, it would follow from natural selection, but I 
now see that the whole problem is so intricate that it 
is safer to leave its solution for the future, 


m 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part TT 


CHAPTEE IX. 

Secondary Sexual Characters in the Lower Classes 
OF THE Animal Kingdom. 

These characters absent in the lowest classes — Hrilliant colours—- 
Mollusca — Annelids — Crustacea, secondary sexual cliaracters 
strongly developed; dimorphism; colour; characters not 
acquired before maturity — Spiders, sexual colours of; stridula- 
tion by the males — Myriapoda. 

With animals belonging to the lower classes, the two 
sexes are not rarely united in the same individual, and 
therefore secondary sexual characters cannot be de- 
veloped. In many cases where the sexes are separate, 
both are permanently attached to some support, and 
the one cannot search or struggle for the other. 
Moreover it is almost certain that these animals have 
too imperfect senses and much too low mental powers, 
to appreciate each other’s beauty or other attractions, 
or to feel rivalry. 

Hence in these classes or sub-kingdoms, such as 
the Protozoa, Coelenterata, Echinodermata, Scolecida, 
secondary sexual characters, of the kind which we have 
to consider, do not occur ; and this fact agrees with 
the belief that such characters in the higher classes 
have been acquired through sexual selection, which 
depends on the will, desire, and choice of either sex. 
Nevertheless some few apparent exceptions occur ; thus, 
as I hear from Dr. Baird ^ the males of certain Entozoa, 


Chai». IX. 


SEXUAL SELECT f ON. 


401 


or internal parasitic worms, differ slightly in colour 
from the females ; but we have no reason to suppose 
that such differences have been augmented through 
sexual selection. Contrivances by which the male 
holds the female, and which are indispensable for the 
propagation of the species, are independent of sexual 
selection, and have been acquired through ordinary 
selection. 

Many of the lower animals, whether hermaphrodites 
or with separate sexes, are ornamented with the most 
brilliant tints, or are shaded and striped in an elegant 
manner; for instance, many corals and sea- anemones 
(Actiniae), some jelly-fish (Medusae, Porpita, &c.), some 
Planariae, many star-fishes. Echini, Ascidians, &c. ; but 
we may conclude from the reasons already indicated, 
namely, the union of the two sexes in some of these 
animals, the permanently affixed condition of others, 
and the low mental powers of all, that such colours do 
not serve as a sexual attraction, and have not been 
acquired through sexual selection. It should be borne 
in mind that in no case have we sufficient evidence 
that colours have been thus acquired, except where one 
sex is much more brilliantly or conspicuously coloured 
than the other, and where there is no difference in 
habits between the sexes sufficient to account for their 
different colours. But the evidence is rendered as 
complete as it can ever be, only when the more 
ornamented individuals, almost always the males, 
voluntarily display their attractions before the other 
sex ; for we cannot believe that such display is useless, 
and if it be advantageous, sexual selection will almost 
inevitably follow. We may, however, extend this 
conclusion to both sexes, when coloured alike, if their 

2 D 


402 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


colours are plainly analogous to those of one sex alone 
ill certain other species of the same group. 

How, then, are we to account for the beautiful or 
even gorgeous colours of many animals in the lowest 
classes? It appears doubtful whether such colours 
often serve as a protection ; but that we may easily 
err on this head, will be admitted by every one who 
reads Mr. Wallace’s excellent essay on this subject. 
It would not, for instance, at first occur to any one 
that the transparency of the Medusm, or jelly-fish, is 
of the highest service to them as a protection; but 
when we are reminded by Hiickel that not only the 
medusae, but many floating mollusca, crustaceans, and 
even small oceanic fishes partake of this same glass- 
like appearance, often accompanied by prismatic co- 
lours, we can hardly doubt that they thus escape the 
notice of pelagic birds and other enemies. M. Giard 
is also convinced^ that the bright tints of certain 
sponges and ascidians serve as a protection. Con- 
spicuous colours are likewise beneficial to many 
animals as a warning to their would-be devourers that 
they are distasteful, or that they possess some special 
means of defence ; but this subject will be discussed 
more conveniently hereafter. 

We can, in our ignorance of most of the lowest ani- 
mals, only say that their bright tints result either from 
the chemical nature or the minute structure of their 
tissues, independently of any benefit thus derived. 
Hardly any colour is finer than that of arterial blood ; 
but there is no reason to suppose that the colour of the 
blood is in itself any advantage ; and though it adds 
to the beauty of the maiden’s cheek, no one will 
* ‘ Archives de Zoolog. Exp^r./ Oct. 1872, p. 563. 


Chap. IX. 


MOLLUSCS. 


403 


pretend that it has been acquired for this purpose. 
So again with many animals, especially the lower ones, 
the bile is richly coloured ; thus, as I am informed by 
Mr. Hancock, the extreme beauty of the Eolidae (naked 
sea-slugs) is chiefly due to the biliary glands being 
seen through the translucent integuments — this beauty 
being probably of no service to these animals. The 
tints of the decaying leaves in an American forest are 
described by every one as gorgeous ; yet no one sup- 
poses that these tints are of the least advantage to the 
trees. Bearing in mind how many substances closely 
analogous to natural organic compounds have been 
recently formed by chemists, and which exhibit the 
most splendid colours, it would have been a strange 
fact if substances similarly coloured had not often 
originated, independently of any useful end thus 
gained, in the complex laboratory of living organisms. 

The sub-kingdom of the Mollusca . — Throughout this 
great division of the animal kingdom, as far as I can 
discover, secondary sexual characters, such as we are 
here considering, never occur. Nor could they be 
expected in the three lowest classes, namely, in the 
Ascidians, Polyzoa, and Brachiopods (constituting the 
Molluscoida of some authors), for most of these animals 
are permanently affixed to a support or have their 
sexes united in the same individual. In the Lamelli- 
branchiata, or bivalve shells, hermaphroditism is not 
rare. In the next higher class of the Gasteropoda, or 
univalve shells, the sexes are either united or separate. 
But in the latter case the males never possess special 
organs for finding, securing, or charming the females, 
or for fighting with other males. As I am informed 


404 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt II. 


by Mr. Gwyn Jeffreys, the sole external difference 
between the sexes consists in the shell sometimes 
differing a little in form ; for instance, the shell of the 
male periwinkle (Littorwa littorea) is narrower and has 
a more elongated spire than that of the female. But 
differences of this nature, it may be presumed, are 
directly connected with the act of reproduction, or 
with the development of the ova. 

The Gasteropoda, though capable of locomotion and 
furnished with imperfect eyes, do not appear to be 
endowed with sufficient mental powers for the members 
of the same sex to struggle together in rivalry, and 
thus to acquire secondary sexual characters. Never- 
theless with the pulmoniferous gasteropods, or land- 
snails, the pairing is preceded by courtship ; for these 
animals, though hermaphrodites, are compelled by 
their structure to pair together. Agassiz remarks,^ 
“ Quiconque a eu I’occasion d’observer les amours des 
limajons, ne saurait mettre en doute la seduction 
“ deployee dans les mouvements et les allures qui 
“ preparent et accomplissent le double embrassement 
“ de ces hermaphrodites.” These animals appear also 
susceptible of some degree of permanent attachment : 
an accurate observer, Mr. Lonsdale, informs me that he 
placed a pair of land-snails, (Helix fomatia), one of 
which was weakly, into a small and ill-provided 
garden. After a short time the strong and healthy 
individual disappeared, and was traced by its track of 
slime over a wall into an adjoining well-stocked garden. 
Mr. Lonsdale concluded that it had deserted its sickly 
mate ; but after an absence of twenty-four hours it 
returned, and apparently communicated the result of 
* ‘ De I’Esp^ce et de la Class.’ &c., 1869, p. 106. 


Chap. IX. MOLLUSCS. 405 

its successful exploration, for both then started along 
the same track and disappeared over the wall. 

Even in the highest class of the Mollusca, the 
Cephalopoda or cuttlefishes, in which the sexes are 
separate, secondary sexual characters of the present 
kind do not, as far as I can discover, occur. This is a 
surprising circumstance, as these animals possess 
highly-developed sense-organs and have considerable 
mental powers, as will be admitted by every one who 
has watched their artful endeavours to escape from an 
enemy.^ Certain Cephalopoda, however, are character- 
ised by one extraordinary sexual character, namely 
that the male element collects within one of the arms 
or tentacles, which is then cast off, and clinging by its 
sucking-discs to the female, lives for a time an 
independent life. So completely does the cast-off arm 
resemble a separate animal, that it was described by 
Cuvier as a parasitic worm under the name of Hectoco- 
tyle. But this marvellous structure may be classed 
as a primary rather than as a secondary sexual 
character. 

Although with the Mollusca sexual selection does 
not seem to have come into play ; yet many univalve 
and bivalve shells, such as volutes, cones, scallops, &c., 
are beautifully coloured and shaped. The colours do 
not appear in most cases to be of any use as a pro- 
tection ; they are probably the direct result, as in the 
lowest classes, of the nature of the tissues; the 
patterns and the sculpture of the shell depending on 
its manner of growth. The amount of light seems to 
be influential to a certain extent; for although, as 

® See, for instance, the account ‘ Journal of Researches,’ 1845, 
which I have given in my p. 7. 


406 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


repeatedly stated by Mr. Gwyn Jeffreys, the shells of 
some species living at a profound depth are brightly 
coloured, yet we generally see the lower surfaces, as 
well as the parts covered by the mantle, less highly- 
coloured than the upper and exposed surfaces.'^ In 
some cases, as with shells living amongst corals or 
brightly-tinted sea-weeds, the bright colours may 
serve as a protection.® But that many of the nudi- 
branch mollusca, or sea-slugs, are as beautifully 
coloured as any shells, may be seen in Messrs. Alder 
and Hancock’s magnificent work ; and from information 
kindly given me by Mr. Hancock, it seems extremely 
doubtful whether these colours usually serve as a 
protection. With some species this may be the case, 
as with one kind which lives on the green leaves of 
algae, and is itself bright-green. But many brightly- 
coloured, white, or otherwise conspicuous species, do 
not seek concealment ; whilst again some equally 
conspicuous species, as well as other dull-coloured 
kinds, live under stones and in dark recesses. So that 
with these nudibranch molluscs, colour apparently does 
not stand in any close relation to the nature of the 
places which they inhabit. 

These naked sea-slugs are hermaphrodites, yet they 
pair together, as do land-snails, many of which have 
extremely pretty shells. It’ is conceivable that two 
hermaphrodites, attracted by each other’s greater 

^ 1 have given (‘ Geolog. censiou, and formed by the 
Observations on Volcanic Is- solution of triturated sea-shells, 
lands,’ 1844, p. 53) a curious ® Dr. Morse has lately dis- 
instance of the influence of light cussed this subject in his paper 
on the colours of a frondescent on the Adaptive Coloration of 
incrustation, deposited by the Mollusca, ‘ Proc. Boston Soc. of 
surf on the coast-rocks of As- Nat. Hist.’ vul. xiv., April, 1871. 


Chap. IX. 


ANNELIDS. 


407 


beanty, might unite and leave offspring which would 
inherit their parents’ greater beauty. But with such 
lowly-organised creatures this is extremely improbable. 
Nor is it at all obvious how the olffspring from the 
more beautiful pairs of hermaphrodites would have any 
advantage over the offspring of the less beautiful, so as 
to increase in number, unless indeed vigour and beauty 
generally coincided. We have not here the case of a 
number of males becoming mature before the females, 
with the more beautiful males selected by the more 
vigorous females. If, indeed, brilliant colours were 
beneficial to a hermaphrodite animal in relation to its 
general habits of life, the more brightly-tinted in- 
dividuals would succeed best and would increase in 
number; but this would be a case of natural and not 
of sexual selection. 

Suh-Jdngdom of the Vermes ; Class, Annelida {or Sea- 
norms ). — In this class, although the sexes, when 
separate, sometimes differ from each other in charac- 
ters of such importance that they have been placed 
under distinct genera or even families, yet the differ- 
ences do not seem of the kind which can he safely 
attributed to sexual selection. These animals are 
often beautifully coloured, but as the sexes do not 
difier in this respect, we are but little concerned with 
them. Even the Nemertians, though so lowly organ- 
ised, “ vie in beauty and variety of colouring with any 
“ other group in the invertebrate series ; ” yet Dr. 
jMcIntosh® cannot discover that these colours are of 
any service. The sedentary annelids become duller- 

^ See his beautiful monograph on ‘British Annelids,’ part i, 
1873, p. 3. 


408 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


coloured, according to M. Quatrefages,’ after the 
period of reproduction ; and this I presume may be 
attributed to their less vigorous condition at that 
time. All these worm-like animals apparently stand 
too low in the scale for the individuals of either sex to 
exert any choice in selecting a partner, or for the 
individuals of the same sex to struggle together in 
rivalry. 

Suh’hingdom of the Arthropoda : Class, Crustacea . — 
In this great class we first meet with undoubted 
secondary sexual characters, often developed in a 
remarkable manner. Unfortunately the habits of 
crustaceans are very imperfectly known, and we cannot 
explain the uses of many structures peculiar to one 
sex. With the lower parasitic species the males are of 
small size, and they alone are furnished with perfect 
swimming-legs, antennae and sense-organs ; the females 
being destitute of these organs, with their bodies often 
consisting of a mere distorted mass. But these extra- 
ordinary differences between the two sexes are no doubt 
related to their widely different habits of life, and con- 
sequently do not concern us. In various crustaceans, 
belonging to distinct families, the anterior antennae 
are furnished with peculiar thread-like bodies, which 
are believed to act as smelling-organs, and these are 
much more numerous in the males than in the females. 
As the males, without any unusual development of 
their olfactory organs, would almost certainly be able 
sooner or later to find the females, the increased 
number of the smelling-threads has probably been 

See M. Perrier, ‘ I'Origine ‘ Pevue Scientifique,’ Feb. 1873, 
de rHornme d’apres Darwin,’ p. 8C6. 


Chap. IX. 


CRUSTACEANS. 


409 


acquired through sexual selection, by the better pro- 
vided males having been the more successful in finding 
partners and in producing offspring. Fritz Muller has 
described a remarkable dimorphic species of Tanais, in 
which the male is represented by two distinct forms, 
which never graduate into each other. In the one form 
the male is furnished with more numerous smelling- 
threads, and in the other form with more powerful and 
more elongated chelae or pincers, which serve to hold 
the female. Fritz Muller suggests that these differ- 
ences between the two male forms of the same species 
may have originated in certain individuals having varied 
in the number of the smelling-threads, whilst other 
individuals varied in the shape and size of their chelae ; 
so that of the former, those which were best able to 
find the female, and of the latter, those which were 
best able to hold her, have left the greatest number of 
progeny to inherit their respective advantages.® 

In some of the lower crustaceans, the right anterior 
antenna of the male differs greatly in structure from 
the left, the latter resembling in its simple tapering 
joints the antennas of the female. In the male the 
modified antenna is either swollen in the middle or 


angularly bent, or converted (fig. 4) into an elegant, 
and sometimes wonderfully complex, prehensile organ.® 
It serves, as I hear from Sir J. Lubbock, to hold the 


* ‘ Facts and Arguments for 
Darwin,^ English translat. 1869, 
p. 20. See the previous discus- 
sion on the olfactory threads. 
Sars has described a somewhat 
analogous case (as quoted in 
‘Nature,’ 1870, p. 455) in a 
Norwegian crustacean, the Pon- 
toporeia ajfinis. 

“See Sir J. Lubbock in 


‘ Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ 
vol. xi. 1853, pi. i. and x. ; and 
vol. xii. (1853) pi. vii. See 
also Lubbock in ‘Transact. Ent. 
Soc.’ vol. iv. new series, 1856- 
1858, p. 8. With respect to the 
zigzagged antennai mentioned 
below, see Fritz Miiller, ‘ Facts 
and Arguments for Darwin,’ 
1869, p. 40, foot-note. 


410 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part TI 


female, and for tins same purpose one of the two 
posterior legs (h) on the same side of the body 
is converted into a forceps. In another family 
the inferior or posterior antennm are “ curiously 
zigzagged ” in the males alone. 

rj, In the higher crustaceans the 

anterior legs are developed into 
chelae or pincers; and these are 
generally larger in the male than 
in the female, — so much so that 
the market value of the male 
edible crab { Cancer pagurus), 
cording to Mr. C. Spence Bate, is 
five times as great as that of the 
female. In many species the 
chelae are of unequal size on the 
opposite side of the body, the 
right-hand one being, as I am 
informed by Mr. Bate, generally, 
though not invariably, the largest. 
This inequality is also often much 
greater in the male than in the 
female. The two chelae of the 
male often differ in structure (figs. 
5, 6, and 7), the smaller one 
resembling that of the female. 
What advantage is gained by their 
inequality in size on the opposite 
sides of the body, and by the inequality being much 
greater in the male than in the female; and why, 
when they are of equal size, both are often much 
larger in the male than in the female, is not known. 
As I hear from Mr. Bate, the chelm are sometimes of 



a. Part i/f right anttrior an- 

tenna of male, forming a 
prehens^ile organ. 

b. Posterior pair of thoracic 

legs of male. 

c. Ditto of iemule. 


Chap. IX. 


CRUSTACEANS. 


411 



such length and size that they cannot possibly be used 
for carrying food to the mouth. In the males of cer- 
tain fresh-water prawns (Palacmon) the right leg is 


Fig. 5. Anterior part of body of Calliana sa (from Milne-Edwards), showing the un- 
equal and different ly-constructed right and left-hand chelae of the male. 

N.B. — 'I'he artist Ly mistake has reversed the drawing, and made the left-hand 
chela the largest. 




Fig G. Second hg of male Orchestia Tucuratinga (from Fritz Mliller). 
Fig 1 . Ditto of female. 


actually longer than the whole body. The great size 
of the one leg with its chelae may aid the male in 


See a paper by Mr. C. 
Spence Bate, with figures, in 
‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 18()8, p. 
363; and on the nonunciature 
of the genus, ibid. p. 585. I 


am greatly indebted to Mr. 
Spf-nce Bate for nearly all the 
above statements with respect 
to the chelfe of the higher 
crustaceans. 



412 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


fighting with his rivals ; hut this will not account for 
their inequality in the female on the opposite sides of 
the body. In Gelasimus, according to a statement 
quoted by Milne-Edwards,^^ the male and the female 
live in the same burrow, and this shews that they 
pair ; the male closes the mouth of the burrow with 
' one of its chelae, which is enormously developed ; so 
that here it indirectly serves as a means of defence. 
Their main use, however, is probably to seize and to 
secure the female, and this in some instances, as with 
Gammarus, is known to he the case. The male of the 
hermit or soldier crab (Pagurus) for weeks together, 
carries about the shell inhabited by the female.'^ The 
sexes, however, of the common shore-crab {Garcinus 
maenas)f as Mr. Bate informs me, unite directly after 
the female has moulted her hard shell, when she is so 
soft that she would be injured if seized by the strong 
pincers of the male ; but as she is caught and carried 
about by the male before moulting, she could then be 
seized with impunity. 

Fritz Muller states that certain species of Melita are 
distinguished from all other amphipods by the females 
having ‘‘ the coxal lamellae of the penultimate pair of 
“ feet produced into hook-like processes, of which the 
“ males lay hold with the hands of the first pair.” The 
development of these hook-like processes has probably 
followed from those females which were the most 
securely held during the act of reproduction, having 
left the largest number of offspring. Another Brazilian 
amphipod (Orchestia Daruinii, fig. 8) presents a case 

‘ Hist. Nat. des Crust.’ tom. Assoc., Fourth Report on the 
ii. 1837, p. 50. Fauna of S. Devon.’ 

Mr. C. Spence Bate, ‘ Brit. 


Chap. IX. 


CKUSTAOEANS. 


413 


of dimorphism, like that of Tanais ; for there are two 
male forms, which differ in the structure of their 
chelae.^® As either chela would certainly suffice to hold 



the female, — for both are now used for this purpose, — 
the two male forms probably originated by some having 

Fritz Muller, ‘ Facts and Arguments for Darwin,’ 1869, 
pp. 25-28. 


414 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


varied in one manner and some in another ; both forms 
having derived certain special, but nearly equal 
advantages, from their differently shaped organs. 

It is not known that male crustaceans fight together 
for the possession of the females, but it is probably the 
case ; for with most animals when the male is larger 
than the female, he seems to owe his greater size to his 
ancestors having fought with other males during many 
generations. In most of the orders, especially in the 
highest or the Brachyura, the male is larger than the 
female; the parasitic genera, however, in which the 
sexes follow different habits of life, and most of the 
Entomostraca must be excepted. The chelae of many 
crustaceans are weapons well adapted for fighting. 
Thus when a Devil-crab {Portunus puber) was seen by 
a son of Mr. Bate fighting with a Careinus masnas, the 
latter was soon thrown on its back, and had every limb 
torn from its body. When several males of a Brazilian 
Gelasimus, a species furnished with immense pincers, 
were placed together in a glass vessel by Fritz Muller, 
they mutilated and killed one another. Mr. Bate put 
a large male Careinus masnas into a pan of water, in- 
habited by a female which was paired with a smaller 
male ; but the latter was soon dispossessed. Mr. Bate 
adds, “ if they fought, the victory was a bloodless one, 
“ for I saw no wounds.” This same naturalist separated 
a male sand-skipper (so common on our sea-shores), 
Gammarus marinus, from its female, both of whom 
were imprisoned in the same vessel with many indivi- 
duals of the same species. The female, when thus 
divorced, soon joined the others. After a time the 
male was put again into the same vessel ; and he then, 
after swimming about for a time, dashed into the crowd, 


Chap. IX. 


CKUSTAOEANS. 


415 


and without any fighting at once took awa^r his wife. 
This fact shews that in the Amphipoda, an order low 
in the scale, the males and females recognise each 
other, and are mutually attached. 

The mental powers of the Crustacea are probably 
higher than at first sight appears probable. Any one 
who tries to catch one of the shore-crabs, so common 
on tropical coasts, will perceive how wary and alert 
they are. There is a large crab (Birgus latro), found 
on coral islands, which makes a thick bed of the picked 
fibres of the cocoa-nut, at the bottom of a deep burrow. 
It feeds on the fallen fruit of this tree by tearing off 
the husk, fibre by fibre ; and it always begins at that 
end where the three eye-like depressions are situated. 
It then breaks through one of these eyes by hammering 
with its heavy front pincers, and turning round, 
extracts the albuminous core with its narrow posterior 
pincers. But these actions are probably instinctive, so 
that they would be performed as well by a young 
animal as by an old one. The following case, however, 
can hardly be so considered : a trustworthy naturalist, 
Mr. Gardner, whilst watching a shore-crab (Gelasimus) 
making its burrow, threw some shells towards the hole. 
One rolled in, and three other shells remained within a 
few inches of the mouth. In about five minutes the 
crab brought out the shell which had fallen in, and 
carried it away to a distance of a foot ; it then saw the 
three other shells lying near, and evidently thinking 
that they might likewise roll in, carried them to the 
spot where it had laid the first. It would, I think, be 

‘ Travels in the Interior of searches,’ p. 463, an account of 
Brazil,’ 1846, p. 111. 1 have the habits of the Birgus. 
given, in my ‘Journal of Re- 


416 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


(iifficult to distinguish this act from one performed by 
man by the aid of reason. 

Mr. Bate does not know of any well-marked case of 
difference of colour in the two sexes of our British 
crustaceans, in which respect the sexes of the higher 
animals so often differ. In some cases, however, the 
males and females differ slightly in tint, but Mr. Bate 
thinks not more than may be accounted for by their 
different habits of life, such as by the male wandering 
more about, and being thus more exposed to the light. 
Dr. Power tried to distinguish by colour the sexes of 
the several species which inhabit the Mauritius, but 
failed, except with one species of Squilla, probably 
S. stylifera, the male of which is described as being “ of 
“ a beautiful bluish-green, ” with some of the appendages 
cherry-red, whilst the female is clouded with brown 
and grey, “ with the red about her much less vivid 
“ than in the male.” In this case, we may suspect the 
agency of sexual selection. From M. Bert’s observa- 
tions on Daphnia, when placed in a vessel illuminated 
by a prism, we have reason to believe that even the 
lowest crustaceans can distinguish colours. With 
Saphirina (an oceanic genus of Entomostraca), the males 
are furnished with minute shields or cell-like bodies, 
which exhibit beautiful changing colours ; these are 
absent in the females, and in both sexes of one species.^® 
It would, however, be extremely rash to conclude that 
these curious organs serve to attract the females. I 
am informed by Fritz Muller, that in the female of a 
Brazilian species of Gelasimus, the whole body is of a 


Mr. Oh. Fraser, in ‘ Free. Power’s statement. 

Zoolog. Soc.’ 1869, p. 3. I am Claus, ‘ Die freilebenden 

indebted to Mr. Bate for Dr. Copepoden,’ .1863, s. 35. 


Chap. IX. 


CRUSTACEANS. 


417 


nearly uniform greyish-brown. In the male the 
posterior part of the cephalo-thorax is pure white, with 
the anterior part of a rich green, shading into dark 
brown ; and it is remarkable that these colours are 
liable to change in the course of a few minutes — the 
white becoming dirty grey or even black, the green 
losing much of its brilliancy.” It deserves especial 
notice that the males do not acquire their bright 
colours until they become mature. They appear to he 
much more numerous than the females ; they differ 
also in the larger size of their chelae. In some species 
of the genus, probably in all, the sexes pair and 
inhabit the same burrow. They are also, as we have 
seen, highly intelligent animals. From these various 
considerations it seems probable that the male in this 
species has become gaily ornamented in order to attract 
or excite the female. 

It has just been stated that the male Gelasimus does 
not acquire his conspicuous colours until mature and 
nearly ready to breed. This seems a general rule in 
the whole class in respect to the many remarkable 
structural differences between the sexes. We shall 
hereafter find the same law prevailing throughout the 
great sub-kingdom of the Vertebra ta ; and in all cases 
it is eminently distinctive of characters which have 
been acquired through sexual selection. Fritz Muller 
gives some striking instances of this law; thus the 
male sand-hopper (Orchestia) does not, until nearly 
full grown, acquire his large claspers, which are very 
differently constructed from those of the female ; whilst 
young, his claspers resemble those of the female. 

Class, Arachnida (Spiders). — The sexes do not 
‘ ^acts and Arguments,’ &c., p. 79. 

2 B 


418 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


generally differ miicli in colour, but the males are often 
darker than the females, as may be seen in Mr. Black- 
wall’s magnificent work.^® In some species, however, 
the difference is conspicuous : thus the female of S'pa- 
rassus smaragdulus is dullish green, whilst the adult 
male has the abdomen of a fine yellow, with three longi- 
tudinal stripes of rich red. In certain species of 
Thomisus the sexes closely resemble each other, in 
others they differ much ; and analogous cases occur in 
many other genera. It is often difficult to say which 
of the two sexes departs most from the ordinary colora- 
tion of the genus to which the species belong ; but 
Mr. Blackwall thinks that, as a general rule, it is the 
male ; and Canestrini remarks that in certain genera 
the males can be specifically distinguished with ease, 
but the females with great difficulty. I am informed 
by Mr. Blackwall that the sexes whilst young usually 
resemble each other ; and both often undergo great 
changes in colour during their successive moults, 
before arriving at maturity. In other cases the male 
alone appears to change colour. Thus the male of the 
above bright-coloured Sparassus at first resembles the 
female, and acquires his peculiar tints only when nearly 
adult. Spiders are possessed of acute senses, and 
exhibit much intelligence ; as is well known, the 
females often shew the strongest affection for their 
eggs, which they carry about enveloped in a silken 
web. The males search eagerly for the females, and 

‘ A History of the Spiders the ‘ Oaratteri sessuali secondarii 
of Great Britain,’ 1861-64. For degli Arachnidi,’ in the ‘ Atti 
the following facts, see pp. 77, della Soc. Veneto-Trentina di 
88, 102. Sc. Nat. Padova,’ vol. i. Fasc. 3, 

This author has recently 1873. 
published a valuable essay on 


Chap. IX. 


SPIDEKS. 


419 


have been seen by Canestrini and others to fight for 
possession of them. This same author says that the 
union of the two sexes has been observed in about 
twenty species; and he asserts positively that the 
female rejects some of the males who court her, 
threatens them with open mandibles, and at last after 
long hesitation accepts the chosen one. From these 
several considerations, we may admit with some con- 
fidence that the well-marked differences in colour 
between the sexes of certain species are the results of 
sexual selection ; though we have not here the best 
kind of evidence, — the display by the male of his 
ornaments. From the extreme variability of colour in 
the male of some species, for instance of Theridion 
lineatum, it would appear that these sexual characters 
of the males have not as yet become well fixed. Canes- 
trini draws the same conclusion from the fact that the 
males of certain species present two forms, differing from 
each other in the size and length of their jaws ; and this 
reminds us of the above cases of dimorphic crustaceans. 

The male is generally much smaller than the female, 
sometimes to an extraordinary degree,^® and he is forced 
to be extremely cautious in making his advances, as 
the female often carries her coyness to a dangerous 
pitch. De Geer saw a male that “ in the midst of his 
“ preparatory caresses was seized by the object of his 
‘‘ attentions, enveloped by her in a web and then 
“ devoured, a sight which, as he adds, filled him with 

Aug. Vinsou (‘ Araneides with legs banded with red. 
des lies de la Eeunion,’ pi. vi. Other even more striking cases 
figs. 1 and 2) gives a good in- of inequality in size between 
stance of the small size of the the sexes have been recorded 
male, in Epeira nigra. In this (‘Quarterly Journal of Science,’ 
species, as I may add, the male is 1868, July, p. 129) ; but I have 
testaceous and the female black not seen the original accounts, 


420 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


“horror and indignation.”^^ The Eev. 0. P. Cam- 
bridge accounts in the following manner for the 
extreme smallness of the male in the genus Nephila. 
“ M. Yinson gives a graphic account of the agile way 
“ in which the diminutive male escapes from the 
“ ferocity of the female, by gliding about and playing 
hide and seek over her body and along her gigantic 
“ limbs : in such a pursuit it is evident that the chances 
“ of escape would be in favour of the smallest males, 
“ while the larger ones would fall early victims ; thus 
“ gradually a diminutive race of males would be selected, 
“ until at last they would dwindle to the smallest 
“ possible size compatible with the exercise of their 
“ generative functions, — in fact probably to the size we 
“ now see them, i.e., so small as to he a sort of parasite 
“ upon the female, and either beneath her notice, oi 
“ too agile and too small for her to catch without great 
“ difficulty.” 

Westring has made the interesting discovery that 
the males of several species of Theridion have the 
power of making a stridulating sound, whilst the females 
are mute. The apparatus consists of a serrated ridge 
at the base of the abdomen, against which the hard 
hinder part of the thorax is rubbed ; and of this struc- 
ture not a trace can he detected in the females. It 
deserves notice that several writers, including the well- 
known arachnologist Walckenaer, have declared that 

® Kirby and Spence, ‘ Intro- guttatum; see Westring, in 
duction to Entomology,’ vol. i. Kroyer, ‘ Naturhist. Tidskrift,’ 
1818, p. 280. vol. iv. 1842-1843, p. 349 ; and 

22 ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 187 1, vol. ii. 1846-1 849, p. 342. See, 
p. 621 also, for other species, ‘ 4raneae 

■2^ Theridion (Asagena^ Sund.) Suecicae,’ p. 184, 
serratipes, i-punctatum et 


Chap. IX. 


SPIDERS. 


421 


spiders are attracted by music.^'* From the analogy of 
the Orthoptera and Homoptera, to be described in the 
next chapter, we may feel almost sure that the stridn- 
lation serves, as Westring also believes, to call or to 
excite the female ; and this is the first case known to 
me in the ascending scale of the animal kingdom of 
sounds emitted for this purpose.^® 


Class, Myriapoda . — In neither of the two orders in 
this class, the millipedes and centipedes, can I find any 
well-marked instances of such sexual difierences as 
more particularly concern us. In Glomeris limbata, 
however, and perhaps in some few other species, the 
males differ slightly in colour from the females; but 
this Glomeris is a highly variable species. In the 
males of the Diplopoda, the legs belonging either to 
one of the anterior or of the posterior segments of the 
body are modified into prehensile hooks which serve to 
secure the female. In some species of lulus the tarsi 
of the male are furnished with membranous suckers for 
the same purpose. As we shall see when we treat of 
Insects, it is a much more unusual circumstance, that 
it is the female in Lithobius, which is furnished with 
prehensile appendages at the extremity of her body 
for holding the male.^® 


“ Dr. H. H. van Zouteveen, 
in his Dutch translation of this 
work (vol. i. p. 444), has collected 
several cases. 

^ Hilgendorf, however, has 
lately ^led attention to an 
analogous structure in some of 
the higher crustaceans, which 


seems adapted to produce sound ; 
see ‘ Zoological Rword,’ 1869, p. 
603. 

“ Walckenaer et P. Gervais, 
‘Hist. Nat. des Insectes; Ap- 
teres,’ tom. iv. 1847, pp. 17, 19, 
68 . 


422 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 1L 


CHAPTEE X. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Insects. 

Diversified structures possessed by the males for seizing the females 
— Differences between the sexes, of which the meaning is not 
understood — Difference in size between the sexes — Thysanura 
— Diptera — Hemiptera — Homoptera, musical powers possessed 
by the males alone — Orthoptera, musical instruments of the 
males, much diversified in structure ; pugnacity ; colours — Neu- 
roptera, sexual differences in colour — Hymenoptera, pugnacity 
and colours — Coleoptera, colours ; furnished with great horns, 
apparently as an ornament ; battles ; stridulating organs generally 
common to both sexes. 

In the immense class of insects the sexes sometimes 
differ in their locomotive-organs, and often in their 
sense-organs, as in the pectinated and beautifully 
plumose antennae of the males of many species. In 
Chloeon, one of the Ephemerae, the male has great 
pillared eyes, of which the female is entirely destitute.' 
The ocelli are absent in the females of certain insects, 
as in the Mutillidae ; and here the females are likewise 
wingless. But we are chiefly concerned with structures 
by which one male is enabled to conquer another, 
either in battle or courtship, through his strength, 
pugnacity, ornaments, or music. The innumerable 
contrivances, therefore, by which the male is able to 

^ Sir J. Lubbock, ‘ Tiansact. tillida© see Westwood, ‘ Modern 
Linnean Soc.’ vol. xxv. 1866, p. Class, of Insects,’ vol. ii. p. 213. 
484. With respect to the Mu- 


Chap. X . 


INSECTS. 


m 


seize the female, may be briefly passed over. Besides 
the complex structures at the apex of the abdomen, 
which ought perhaps to be ranked as primary organs,^ 
“ it is astonishing,” as Mr B. D. Walsh ^ has remarked, 
“ how many different organs are worked in by nature 
“for the seemingly insignificant object of enabling- 
“ the male to grasp the female firmly.” The mandibles 
or jaws are sometimes used for this purpose ; thus the 
male Gorijdalis cornutus (a neuropterous insect in some 
degree allied to the Dragon flies, &c.) has immense 
curved jaws, many times longer than those of the 
female ; and they are smooth instead of being toothed, 
so that he is thus enabled to seize her without injury.'^ 
One of the stag-beetles of North America (Lucanus 
elaphus) uses his jaws, which are much larger than 
those of the female, for the same purpose, but pro- 
bably likewise for fighting. In one of the sand- wasps 
(Ammophila) the jaws in the two sexes are closely alike, 
but are used for widely different purposes : the males, 
as Professor Westwood observes, “are exceedingly 


^ These organs in the male 
often differ in closely-allied 
species, and afford excellent 
specific characters. But their 
importance, from a functional 
point of view, as Mr. K. Mac- 
Lachlan has remarked to me, 
has probably been overrated. It 
has been suggested, that slight 
differences in these organs would 
sufiice to prevent the intercross- 
ing of well-marked varieties or 
incipient species, and would thus 
aid in their development. That 
this can hardly be the case, we 
may infer firom the many re- 
corded cases (see, for instance, 
Bronn, ‘ Geschichte der Natur,’ 


B. ii. 1843, s. 164 ; and West' 
wood, * Transact. Ent. Soc.’ vol. 
iii. 1842, p. 195) of distinct 
species having been observed in 
union. Mr. Mac Lachlan in- 
forms me (vide ‘ Stett. Ent. 
Zeitung,’ 1867, s. 155) that 
when several species of Phry- 
ganidaa, which present strongly- 
pronounced differences of this 
kind, were confined together by 
Dr. Aug. Meyer, they coupled, 
and one pair produced fertile 
ova. 

^ ‘The Practical Entomo- 
logist,’ Philadelphia, vol. ii. 
May, 1867, p. 88. 

^ Mr. Walsh, ibid. p. 107. 


424 


tHE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 




‘‘ ardent, seizing their partners round the neck with 
“ their sickle-shaped jaws ; ” ^ whilst the females use 
these organs for burrowing in sand-banks and making 
their nests. 

The tarsi of the front-legs are dilated in many male 
beetles, or are furnished with 
broad cushions of hairs ; and 
in many genera of water- 
beetles they are armed with 
a round flat sucker, so that 
the male may adhere to the 
slippery body of the female. 
It is a much more unusual 
circumstance that the fe- 
males of some water-beetles 
(Dytiscus) have their elytra 
deeply grooved, and in Aeilius 
suleatus thickly set with 
hairs, as an aid to the male. 
The females of some other 

Fig.». Crabmcribrariu.. tipper figure, ^ater-beetles (Hydroporus) 
male; lower figure, feiuale. glytia punctured 

for the same purpose.® In the male of Grdbro cribrarius 
(flg. 9), it is the tibia which is dilated into a broad 
horny plate, with minute membraneous dots, giving to 


® ‘ Modern Classification of In- 
sects,’ vol. ii. 1840, pp. 205, 206. 
Mr. Walsh, who called my at- 
tention to the double use of the 
jaws, says that he has repeatedly 
observed this fact. 

® We have here a curious and 
inexplicable case of dimorphism, 
for some of the females of four 
European species of Dysticus, 
and of certain species of Hydro- 


porus, have their elytra smooth ; 
and no intermediate gradations 
between the sulcated or punc- 
tured, and the quite smooth 
elytra have been observed. See 
Dr. H. Schaum, as quoted 
in the ‘ Zoologist,’ vol. v.-vi. 
1847-48, p. 1896. Also Kirby 
and Spence, ‘ Introduction to 
Entomology,’ vol. iii. 1826, p. 
305. 


C5hap. X. 


INSECTS. 


425 


it a singular appearance like that of a riddle.’ In the 
male of Penthe (a genus of beetles) a few of the middle 
joints of the antennae are dilated and 
furnished on the inferior surface with 
cushions of hair, exactly like those on 
the tarsi of the Carahidae, “ and ob- 
“ viously for the same end.” In male 
dragon-flies, “ the appendages at the tip 
“ of the tail are modified in an almost 
‘‘ infinite variety of curious patterns to 
“ enable them to embrace the neck of 
“ the female.” Lastly,, in the males of 
many insects, the legs are furnished 
with peculiar spines, knobs or spurs ; 
or the whole leg is bowed or thickened, 
but this is by no means invariably a 
sexual character; or one pair, or all 
three pairs are elongated, sometimes to 
an extravagant length.® 

The sexes of many species in all the 
orders present differences, of which 
the meaning is not understood. One 
curious case is that of a beetle (fig. 10), 
the male of which has left mandible 
much enlarged ; so that the mouth is 
greatly distorted. In another Cara- 
bidous beetle, Eurygnathus,® we have 
the case, unique as far as known to 
Mr. Wollaston of the head of the female 




Fig. 10. Tapbroderea 
distortiiB (much en- 
larged). Upper figure, 
male ; lower figure, 
female. 


’ Westwood, ‘ Modern Glass.’ 
vol. ii. p. 193. The following 
statement about Penthe, and 
others in inverted commas, are 
taken from Mr. Walsh, ‘ Practi- 
cal Entomologist,’ Philadelphia, 


vol. iii. p. 88. 

® Kirby and Spence, ‘ In- 
troduct.’ &c., vol. iii. pp. 332- 
336. 

® ‘ Insecta Maderensia,’ 1854, 

p. 20. 


426 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


being much broader and larger, though in a variable 
degree, than that of the male. Any number of such 
cases could be given. They abound in the Lepidoptera : 
one of the most extraordinary is that certain male 
butterflies have their fore -legs more or less atrophied, 
with the tibiae and tarsi reduced to mere rudimentary 
knobs. The wings, also, in the two sexes often differ in 
neuration,^® and sometimes considerably in outline, as 
in the Aricoris epitus, which was shewn to me in the 
British Museum by Mr. A. Butler. The males of 
certain South American butterflies have tufts of hair 
on the margins of the wings, and horny excrescences 
on the discs of the posterior pair.^^ In several British 
butterflies, as shewn by Mr. Wonfor, the males alone 
are in parts clothed with peculiar scales. 

The use of the bright light of the female glow-worm 
has been subject to much discussion. The male is 
feebly luminous, as are the larvae and even the eggs. 
It has been supposed by some authors that the light 
serves to frighten away enemies, and by others to 
guide the male to the female. At last, Mr. Belt 
appears to have solved the difficulty : he finds that all 
the Lampyridae which he has tried are highly dis- 
tasteful to insectivorous mammals and birds. Hence 
it is in accordance with Mr. Bates’ view, hereafter to 
be explained, that many insects mimic the Lampyridae 
closely, in order to be mistaken for them, and thus to 

E. Doubleday, ‘ Annals and p. 74. Mr. Wonfor’s observa- 
Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ vol. i. 1848, tions are quoted in ‘Popular 
p. 379. I may add that the Science Review,’ 1868, p. 343. 
wings in certain Hyraenoptera ‘The Naturalist in Nica- 

(see Shuckard, ‘Fossorial Hy- ragua,’ 1874, pp. 316-320. On 
menop.’ 1837, pp. 39-43) differ the phosphorescence of the eggs, 
in neuration according to sex. see ‘Annals and Mag. of Nat. 

“ H. W. Bates, in ‘Journal Hist.’ 1871, Nov., p. 372. 

of Proc. Linn. Soc.’ vol. vi. 1862, 


Chap. X. 


INSECTS. 


427 


escape destruction. He further believes that the 
luminous species profit by being at once recognised as 
unpalatable. It is probable that the same explanation 
may be extended to the Elaters, both sexes of which 
are highly luminous. It is not known why the wings 
of the female glow-worm have not been developed ; 
but in her present state she closely resembles a larva, 
and as larvae are so largely preyed on by many 
animals, we can understand why she has been 
rendered so much more luminous and conspicuous 
than the male ; and why the larvae themselves are 
likewise luminous. 

Difference in Size between the Sexes . — With insects of 
all kinds the males are commonly smaller than the 
females ; and this difference can often be detected 
even in the larval state. So considerable is the 
difference between the male and female cocoons of the 
silk-moth (Bomhyx mori), that in France they are 
separated by a particular mode of weighing.^^ In the 
lower classes of the animal kingdom, the greater size 
of the females seems generally to depend on their de- 
veloping an enormous number of ova; and this may 
to a certain extent hold good with insects. But Dr. 
Wallace has suggested a much more probable expla- 
nation. He finds, after carefully attending to the 
development of the caterpillars of Bomhyx cynthia and 
yamamaiy and especially to that of some dwarfed 
caterpillars reared from a second brood on unnatural 
food, “ that in proportion as the individual moth is 
“ finer, so is the time required for its metamorphosis 
“ longer ; and for this reason the female, which is the 
“ larger and heavier insect, from having to carry her 
Robinet, ‘ Yers Soie,’ 1848, p. 207. 


428 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


“ namerous eggs, will be preceded by the male, which 
is smaller and has less to mature.” Now as most 
insects are short-lived, and as they are exposed to 
many dangers, it would manifestly be advantageous to 
the female to be impregnated as soon as possible. 
This end would be gained by the males being first 
raatured in large numbers ready for the advent of the 
females ; and this again would naturally follow, as 
Mr. A. K. Wallace has remarked,^® through natural 
selection ; for the smaller males would be first 
matured, and thus would procreate a large number of 
offspring which would inherit the reduced size of their 
male parents, whilst the larger males from being 
matured later would leave fewer offspring. 

There are, however, exceptions to the rule of male 
insects being smaller than the females : and some of 
these exceptions are intelligible. Size and strength 
would be an advantage to the males, which fight for 
the possession of the females ; and in these cases, as 
with the stag-beetle (Lucanus), the males are larger 
than the females. There are, however, other beetles 
which are not known to fight together, of which the 
males exceed the females in size ; and the meaning of 
this fact is not known ; but in some of these cases, as 
with the huge Dynastes and Megasoma, we can at 
least see that there would be no necessity for the 
males to be smaller than the females, in order to be 
matured before them, for these beetles are not short- 
lived, and there would be ample time for the pairing 
of the sexes. So again, male dragon-flies (Libel- 
lulidse) are sometimes sensibly larger, and never 

‘ Transact. Ent. Soc.’ 3rd ‘ Journal of Proc. Ent. Soc.’ 

scries, vol. v. p. 486. Feb. 4th, 1867, p. Ixxi. 


Chap. X. 


THYSANURA. 


429 


smaller, than the females ; and as Mr. MacLachlan 
believes, they do not generally pair with the females 
until a week or fortnight has elapsed, and until they 
have assumed their proper masculine colours. But 
the most curious case, shewing on what complex and 
easily-overlooked relations, so trifling a character as 
difference in size between the sexes may depend, is 
that of the aculeate Hymenoptera ; for Mr. F. Smith 
informs me that throughout nearly the whole of this 
large group, the males, in accordance with the general 
rule, are smaller than the females, and emerge about 
a week before them ; but amongst the Bees, the males 
of Ajpis mellijiea, Anthidium manicatum, and Antho- 
phora acervorum, and amongst the Fossores, the males 
of the Methoca ichneumonides, are larger than the 
females. The explanation of this anomaly is that a 
marriage flight is absolutely necessary with these 
species, and the male requires great strength and size 
in order to carry the female through the air. In- 
creased size has here been acquired in opposition to 
the usual relation between size and the period of de- 
velopment, for the males, though larger, emerge before 
the smaller females. 

We will now review the several Orders, selecting 
such facts as more particularly concern us. The 
Lepidoptera (Butterflies and Moths) will be retained 
for a separate chapter. 

Order, Thysanura. — The members of this lowly 
organized order are wingless, dull-colourei, minute 

“ For this and other state- iii. p. 300; on the duration of 
menta on the size of the sexes, life in insects, see p. 344. 
sec Kirby and Spence, ibid, vol, 


430 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


insects, with ugly, almost misshapen heads and bodies. 
Their sexes do not dijBfer, hut they are interesting as 
shewing us that the males pay sedulous court to the 
females even low down in the animal scale. Sir J. 
Lubbock says : “ it is very amusing to see these 
“ little creatures (Smynthurus luteus) coquetting 
“ together. The male, which is much smaller than the 
“ female, runs round her, and they butt one another, 
“ standing face to face and moving backward and 
“forward like two playful lambs. Then the female 
“ pretends to run away and the male runs after her 
“ with a queer appearance of anger, gets in front and 
“ stands facing her again ; then she turns coyly round, 
“ hut he, quicker and more active, scuttles round too, 
“ and seems to whip her with his antennae ; then for a 
“ hit they stand face to face, play with their antennae, 
“ and seem to be all in all to one another.” 

Order, Diptera (Flies). — The sexes differ little in 
colour. The greatest difference, known to Mr. F. 
Walker, is in the genus Bihio, in which the males are 
blackish or quite black, and the females obscure 
brownish-orange. The genus Elaphomyia, discovered 
by Mr. Wallace^® in New Guinea, is highly remark- 
able, as the males are furnished with horns, of which 
the females are quite destitute. The horns spring 
from beneath the eyes, and curiously resemble those of 
a stag, being either branched or palmated. In one of 
the species, they equal the whole body in length. 
They might be thought to be adapted for fighting, but 
as in one species they are of a beautiful pink colour, 

‘ Transact. Linnean Soc.’ ‘ The Malay Archipelago,’ 

vol. xxvi. 1868, p. 296, vol ii. 1869, p. 313, 


Chap. X. 


HEMIPTEEA. 


431 


edged with black, with a pale central stripe, and as 
these insects have altogether a very elegant appear- 
ance, it is perhaps more probable that they serve as 
ornaments. That the males of some Diptera fight 
together is certain ; Prof. Westwood has several 
times seen this with the Tipulae. The males of other 
Diptera apparently try to win the females by their 
music : H. Muller watched for some time two males 
of an Eristalis courting a female ; they hovered above 
her, and flew from side to side, making a high 
humming noise at the same time. Gnats and 
mosquitoes (Culicidee) also seem to attract each other 
by humming ; and Prof. Mayer has recently ascer- 
tained that the hairs on the antennae of the male 
vibrate in unison with the notes of a tuning-fork, 
within the range of the sounds emitted by the female. 
The longer hairs vibrate sympathetically with the 
graver notes, and the shorter hairs with the higher ones. 
Landois also asserts that he has repeatedly drawn down 
a whole swarm of gnats by uttering a particular note. 
It may be added that the mental faculties of the Diptera 
are probably higher than in most other insects, in ac- 
cordance with their highly-developed nervous system. 


Order, Hemiptera (Field-Bugs). — Mr. J. W. Douglas, 
who has particularly attended to the British species, 
has kindly given me an account of their sexual differ- 


‘Modem Classification of 
Insects,’ vol. ii. 1840, p. 526. 

^ Anwendung, <fcc., ‘ Verb. d. 
n. V. Jahrg.’ xxix. p. 80. Mayer, 
in ‘American Naturalist,’ 1874, 
p. 236. 

See Mr. B. T. Lowne’s in- 
teresting work, ‘On the Ana- 


tomy of the Blow-fly, Musca 
vomitoria,’ 1870, p. 14. He 
remarks (p. 33) that, “ the 
“captured flies utter a peculiar 
“plaintive note, and that this 
“ sound causes other flies to 
“ disappear,” 


432 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


ences. The males of some species are furnished with 
wings, whilst the females are wingless ; the sexes differ 
in the form of their bodies, elytra, antennae and tarsi ; 
but as the signification of these differences are unknown, 
they may he here passed over. The females are generally 
larger and more robust than the males. With British, 
and, as far as Mr. Douglas knows, with exotic species, 
the sexes do not commonly differ much in colour ; but 
in about six British species the male is considerably 
darker than the female, and in aboiit four other species 
the female is darker than the male. Both sexes of 
some species are beautifully coloured ; and as these 
insects emit an extremely nauseous odour, their con- 
spicuous colours may serve as a signal that they are 
unpalatable to insectivorous animals. In some few 
cases their colours appear to be directly protective : 
thus Prof. Hoffmann informs me that he could hardly 
distinguish a small pink and green species from the 
buds on the trunks of lime-trees, which this insect 
frequents. 

Some species of Eeduvidae make a stridulating noise ; 
and, in the case of Pirates stridulm, this is said to 
be effected by the movement of the neck within the 
pro- thoracic cavity. According to Westring, Beduvius 
personatus also stridulates. But I have no reason to 
suppose that this is a sexual character, excepting that 
with non-social insects there seems to be no use for 
sound-producing organs, unless it be as a sexual call. 

Order, Homoptera . — Every one who has wandered in 
a tropical forest must have been astonished at the din 
made by the male Cicadae. The females are mute ; as 
^ Westwood, ‘ Modem Class, of Insects,’ vol. ii. p. 473, 


Chap. X. 


HOMOPTERA, 


438 


the Grecian poet Xenarchus says, “ Happy the Cicadas 
“ live, since they all have voiceless wives.” The noise 
thus made could be plainly heard on board the 
“ Beagle,” when anchored at a quarter of a mile from 
the shore of Brazil ; and Captain Hancock says it can 
be heard at the distance of a mile. The Greeks 
formerly kept, and the Chinese now keep these insects 
in cages for the sake of their song, so that it must be 
pleasing to the ears of some men.^^ The Cicadida3 
usually sing during the day, whilst the Fulgoridas 
appear to be night-songsters. The sound, according 
to Landois,^'^ is produced by the vibration of the 
lips of the spiracles, which are set into motion by a 
current of air emitted from the tracheae ; but this view 
has lately been disputed. Dr. Powell appears to have 
proved that it is produced by the vibration of a mem- 
brane, set into action by a special muscle. In the 
living insect, whilst stridulating, this membrane can 
be seen to vibrate ; and in the dead insect the proper 
sound is heard, if the muscle, when a little dried and 
hardened, is pulled with the point of a pin. In the 
female the whole complex musical apparatus is present, 
but is muck less developed than in the male, and is 
never used for producing sound. 

With respect to the object of the music. Dr. Hart- 
man, in speaking of the Cicada septemdecim of the 
United States, says,^® “ the drums are now (June 6th 


® These particulars are taken 
from Westwood’s ‘ Modem Class, 
of Insects,’ vol. ii. 1840, p. 422. 
See, also, on the Fulgoridae 
Kirby and Spence, ‘ Introduct.’ 
vol. ii. p. 401. 

“ ‘ Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft 
Zooiog.’ B. xvii. 1867, s. 152-158. 


“ ‘Transact. New Zealand 
Institute,’ vol. v. 1873, p. 286. 

“ I am indebted to Mr. Walsh 
for having sent me this extract 
from a ‘Journal of the Doings 
of Cicada septemdecim’ by Dr. 
Hartman. 


434 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past II. 


and 7 th, 1851) heard in all directions. This I believe 
“ to be the marital summons from the males. Standing 
" in thick chestnut sprouts about as high as my head, 
“ where hundreds were around me, I observed the 
“females coming around the drumming males.” He 
adds, “ this season (Aug. 1868) a dwarf pear-tree in 
“ my garden produced about fifty larvae of Cic.pruinosa ; 
“ and I several times noticed the females to alight near 
“ a male while he was uttering his clanging notes.” 
Fritz Muller writes to me from S. Brazil that he has 
often listened to a musical contest between two or 
three males of a species with a particularly loud voice, 
seated at a considerable distance from each other : as 
soon as one had finished his song, another immediately 
began, and then another. As there is so much rivalry 
between the males, it is probable that the females not 
only find them by their sounds, but that, like female 
birds, they are excited or allured by the male with the 
most attractive voice. 

I have not heard of any well-marked cases of orna- 
mental differences between the sexes of the Homoptera. 
Mr. Douglas informs me that there are three British 
species, in which the male is black or marked with 
black bands, whilst the females are pale-coloured or 
obscure. 

Order, Orthoptera (Crickets and Grasshoppers). — The 
males in the three saltatorial families in this Order are 
remarkable for their musical powers, namely the Ache- 
tid.e or crickets, the Locustidae for which there is no 
equivalent English name, and the Acridiidae or grass- 
hoppers. The stridulation produced by some of the 
Locustidae is so loud that it can be heard during the 


Chap. X. 


ORTHOPTEBA. 


435 


night at the distance of a mile ; and that made by 
certain species is not unmusical even to the human ear, 
so that the Indians on the Amazons keep them in 
wicker cages. All observers agree that the sounds serve 
either to call or excite the mute females. With respect 
to the migratory locusts of Kussia, Korte has given^® 
an interesting case of selection by the female of a male. 
The males of this species {Pachytylus migratorius) 
whilst coupled with the female stridulate from anger 
or jealousy, if approached by other males. The house- 
cricket when surprised at night uses its voice to warn 
its fellows.^® In North America the Katy-did (Platy- 
phyllnm concavum, one of the Locus tidae) is described^® 
as mounting on the upper branches of a tree, and in 
the evening beginning “ his noisy babble, while rival 
“notes issue from the neighbouring trees, and the 
“ groves resound with the call of Katy-did-she-did the 
“live-long night.” Mr. Bates, in speaking of the 
European field-cricket (one of the Achetidse), says 
“ the male has been observed to place himself in the 
“ evening at the entrance of his burrow, and stridulate 
“ until a female approaches, when the louder notes are 
“ succeeded by a more subdued tone, whilst the success- 
“ ful musician caresses with his antennae the mate he 
“ has won.” Dr. Scudder was able to excite one of 


these insects to answer him, by rubbing on a file with 


^ L. Guilding, ‘ Transact. 
Linn. Soc.’ vol. xv. p. 154. 

I state this on the authority 
of Koppen, ‘ Ueber die Heusch- 
recken in Siidrussland,* 1866, 
p. 32, for I have in vain "en- 
deavoured to procure Korte's 
work. 

“ Gilbert White, ‘ Nat. Hist, 
of Selborne,* vol. ii. 1825, p. 262. 


Harris, ‘Insects of New 
England,’ 1842, p. 128. 

‘The Naturalist on the 
Amazons,’ vol. i. 1863, p. 252. 
Mr. Bates gives a very interest- 
ing discussion on the gradations 
in the musical apparatus of the 
three families. See also West- 
wood, ‘Modern Class.’ vol. ii. 
pp. 445 and 453. 


486 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Pabt II. 


a quill In both sexes a remarkable auditory appa- 
ratus has been discovered by Yon Siebold, situated in 
the front legs.®^ 

In the three Families the sounds are differently 
produced. In the males of the Achetidse both wing- 
covers have the same apparatus ; and this in the field- 
cricket (Gryllus campestris, fig. 11) consists, as des- 
cribed by Landois,^* of from 131 to 138 sharp, trans- 
verse ridges or teeth (s^) 
on the under side of one 
of the nervures of the 
wing-cover. This toothed 
nervure is rapidly scraped 
across a projecting, 
smooth, hard nervure (r) 
on the upper surface of 
the opposite wing. First 
one wing is rubbed over 
the other, and then the 

Fig. 11. Gryllns campestris (from Landols). 

Right-hand figure, under side of part of a movement iS reVCrsed. 
wing-nervure, much magnified, showing 

the teeth, J3oth wings are raised a 

Left-hand figure, upper surface of wing- . 

cover, with the projecting, smooth nervure, little at the Same time, SO 
r, across which the teeth (st) are scraped. , ^ 

as to increase the reson- 
ance. In some species the wing-covers of the males are 
furnished at the base with a talc-like plate.^® I here give 
a drawing (fig. 12) of the teeth on the under side of the 
nervure of another species of Gryllus, viz., G. domesti- 
cus. With respect to the formation of these teeth, 
Dr. Gruber has shewn that they have been developed 




‘ Proc. Boston Soc. of Nat. 
Hist.’ vol. xi. April, 1868. 

“ ‘Nouveau Manuel d’Anat. 
Comp.’ (French translat.), tom. 
1, 1850, p. 567. 


^ ‘ Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft. 
Zoolog.’ B. xvii. 1867, s. 117. 

“ Westwood, ‘ Modem Class, 
of Insects,’ vol. i. p. 440. 

“ ‘ Ueber der Tonapparat der 


Chap X. 


ORTHOPTERA. 


437 


by the aid of selection, from the minute scales and 
hairs with which the wings and body are covered, and 
I came to the same conclusion with respect to those of 
the Coleoptera. But Dr. Gruber further shews that 
their development is in part directly due to the stimu- 
lus from the friction of one wing over the other. 

In the Locustidse the opposite wing- 
covers differ from each other in struc- 
ture (fig. 13), and the action cannot, as 
in the last family, be reversed. The 
left wing, which acts as the bow, lies 
over the right wing which serves as 
the fiddle. One of the nervures (a) 
on the under surface of the former is 
finely serrated, and is scraped across 
the prominent nervures on the upper Landois). 

surface of the opposite or right wing. In our British 
Phasgonura viridissima it appeared to me that the 
serrated nervure is rubbed against the rounded hind- 
corner of the opposite wing, the edge of which is 
thickened, coloured brown, and very sharp. In the 
right wing, but not in the left, there is a little plate, 
as transparent as talc, surrounded by nervures, and 
called the speculum. In Ephippiger vitium, a member 
of this same family, we have a curious subordinate 
modification ; for the wing-covers are greatly reduced 
in size, but “ the posterior part of the pro-thorax is 
“ elevated into a kind of dome over the wing-covers, 
“ and which has probably the effect of increasing the 
“ sound.” 


Locustiden, ein Beiteag zum p. 100. 

Darwinismus,’ ‘ Zeitsch. fur wis- Westwood, ‘ Modem Class, 

sensch. Zoolog.’ B. xxii. 1872, of Insects,* v«i. i. p. 463. 



Fig. 12. Teeth of Ner- 
vure of Gryllus domes- 



438 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Pabt II 

We thus see that the musical apparatus is more 
differentiated or specialised in the Locustidae (which 
include, I belieye, the most powerful performers in the 
Order), than in the Achetidse, in which both wing- 


Fig. 13. Chloroccelus Tanana (from Bates), a, b. Lobes of opposite wing-covera. 

covers have the same structure and the same function.^® 
Landois, however, detected in one of the Locustidae, 
namely in Decticus, a short and narrow row of small 
teeth, mere rudiments, on the inferior surface of the 
right wing-cover, which underlies the other and is 
never used as the bow. I observed the same rudimen- 
tary structure on the under side of the right wing- 
cover in Phasgonura viridissima. Hence we may infer 

Landois, ‘ Zeitsch. f. wiss. Zoolog.* B. xvii. 1867, s. 121, 122. 


Chap. X. 


ORTHOPTERA. 


439 


with confidence that the Locustidse are descended from 
a form, in which, as in the existing Achetidae, both 
wing-covers had serrated nervnres on the under surface, 
and could be indifferently used as the how ; hut that 
in the Lociistidae the two wing-covers gradually became 
differentiated and perfected, on the principle of the 
division of labour, the one to act exclusively as the 
bow, and the other as the fiddle. Dr. Gruber takes 
the same view, and has showm that rudimentary teeth 
are commonly found on 
the inferior surface of 
the right wing. By what 
steps the more simple 
apparatus in the Achetidm 
originated, we do not 
know, but it is probable 
that the basal portions 
of the wing-covers origi- 
nally overlapped each 
other as they do at pre- 
sent; and that the fric- 
tion of the nervures pro- 
duced a grating sound, as is now the case with the 
wing-covers of the females.®^ A grating sound thus 
occasionally and accidentally made by the males, if it 
served them ever so little as a love-call to the females, 
might readily have been intensified through sexual 
selection, by variations in the roughness of the nervures 
having been continually preserved. 

In the last and third Family, namely the Acridiidae 



Fig. 14. Hind-leg of Stenobothrus prato’-um : 
r, the stridulating ridge ; lower figure, the 
teeth forming the ridge, much magnified 
(from Landois). 


Mr. Walsh also informs me cavum, “ when captured makes 

that he has noticed that the “ a feeble grating noise by shuf- 

female of the Platyphyllum con- “ fling her wing-covers together.’ 


440 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part H 


or grasshoppers, the stridulation is produced in a very 
different manner, and according to Dr. Scudder, is not 
so shrill as in the preceding Families. The inner 
surface of the femur (fig. 14, r) is furnished with a 
longitudinal row of minute, elegant, lancet-shaped, 
elastic teeth, from 85 to 93 in number ; and these are 
scraped across the sharp, projecting nervures on the 
wing-covers, which are thus made to vibrate and 
resound. Harris says that when one of the males 
begins to play, he first “ bends the shank of the hind- 
“ leg beneath the thigh, where it is lodged in a furrow 
“ designed to receive it, and then draws the leg briskly 
“ up and down. He does not play both fiddles together, 
but alternately, first upon one and then on the other.” 
Tn many species, the base of the abdomen is hollowed 
out into a great cavity which is believed to act as a 
resounding board. In Pneumora (Fig. 15), a S. African 
genus belonging to the same family, we meet with a new 
and remarkable modification ; in the males a small 
notched ridge projects obliquely from each side of the 
abdomen, against which the hind femora are rubbed.^^ 
As the male is furnished with wings (the female being 
wingless), it is remarkable that the thighs are not 
rubbed in the usual manner against the wing-covers ; 
but this may perhaps be accounted for by the unusually 
small size of the hind-legs. I have not been able to 
examine the inner surface of the thighs, which, judging 
from analogy, would be finely serrated. The species 
of Pneumora have been more profoundly modified for 
the sake of stridulation than any other orthopterous 

Landois, ibid. s. 113. ^ Westwood, ‘ Modern Classi- 

‘Insects of New England,’ fication,’ vol. i. p. 462, 

1842, p. 133. 


Chap. X. 


OETHOPTEEA. 


441 


insect ; for in the male the whole body has been con- 
verted into a musical instrument, being distended with 
air, like a great pellucid bladder, so as to increase the 
resonance. Mr. Trimen informs me that at the Cape 



Fig. 16. Pneamora (from specimens In the British Museum). Upper figure, mala ; 
lower figure, female. 

of Good Hope these insects make a wonderful noise 
during the night. 

In the three foregoing families, the females are 
almost always destitute of an efficient musical 
apparatus. But there are a few exceptions to this 
rule, for Dr. Gruber has shewn that both sexes of 


442 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


Ephiiojpiger vitium are thus provided ; though the 
organs differ in the male and female to a certain 
extent. Hence we cannot suppose that they have been 
transferred from the male to the female, as appears to 
have been the case with the secondary sexual characters 
of many other animals. They must have been inde- 
pendently developed in the two sexes, which no doubt 
mutually call to each other during the season of love. 
In most other Locustidae (but not according to Landois 
in Decticus) the females have rudiments of the stridu- 
latory organs proper to the male ; from whom it is 
probable that these have been transferred. Landois 
also found such rudiments on the under surface of the 
wing-covers of the female Achetidse, and on the 
femora of the female Acridiidae. In the Homoptera, 
also, the females have the proper musical apparatus 
in a functionless state ; and we shall hereafter 
meet in other divisions of the animal kingdom 
with many instances of structures proper to the 
male being present in a rudimentary condition in the 
female. 

Landois has observed another important fact, 
namely, that in the females of the Acridiidae, the 
stridulating teeth on the femora remain throughout 
life in the same condition in which they first ap- 
pear during the larval state in both sexes. In 
the males, on the other hand, they become further 
developed, and acquire their perfect structure at 
the last moult, when the insect is mature and ready 
to breed. 

From the facts now given, we see that the means by 
which the males of the Orthoptera produce their sounds 
are extremely diversified, and are altogether different 


Chap X. 


ORTHOPTERA. 


443 


from those employed by the Homoptera^^ But 
throughout the animal kingdom we often find the 
same object gained by the most diversified means ; 
this seems due to the whole organisation having under- 
gone multifarious changes in the course of ages, and as 
part after part varied different variations were taken 
advantage of for the same general purpose. The 
diversity of means for producing sound in the three 
families of the Orthoptera and in the Homoptera, 
impresses the mind with the high importance of these 
structures to the males, for the sake of calling or 
alluring the females. We need feel no surprise at the 
amount of modification which the Orthoptera have 
undergone in this respect, as we now know, from Dr. 
Scudder’s remarkable discovery,^^ that there has been 
more than ample time. This naturalist has lately 
found a fossil insect in the Devonian formation of 
New Brunswick, which is furnished with “ the well- 
“ known tympanum or stridulating apparatus of the 
‘‘ male Locustidae.” The insect, though in most respects 
related to the Neuroptera, appears, as is so often the 
case with very ancient forms, to connect the two 
related Orders of the Neuroptera and Orthoptera. 

I have but little more to say on the Orthoptera. 
Some of the species are very pugnacious : when two 
male field-crickets (Gryllus campestris) are confined 
together, they fight till one kills the other ; and the 
species of Mantis are described as manoeuvring with 

Landois has recently found fiir wissensch. Zoolog.’ B. xxii. 
in certain Orthoptera rudimen- Heft 3, 1871, p. 348. 
tary structures closely similar ^ ‘ Transact. Ent. Soc.’ 3rd 
to the sound-producing organs series, vol. ii. (‘ Journal of 
in the Homoptera ; and this is a Proceedings,’ p 117.) 
surprising fact. See ‘Zeitschr. 


444 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


their sword-like front-limbs, like * hussars with their 
sabres. The Chinese keep these insects in little 
bamboo cages, and match them like game-cocks.^® 
With respect to colour, some exotic locusts are beauti- 
fully ornamented; the posterior wings being marked 
with red, blue, and black; hut as throughout the 
Order the sexes rarely differ much in colour, it is not 
probable that they owe their bright tints to sexual 
selection. Conspicuous colours may he of use to these 
insects, by giving notice that they are unpalatable. 
Thus it has been observed*® that a bright-coloured 
Indian locust was invariably rejected when offered to 
birds and lizards. Some cases, however, are known of 
sexual differences in colour in this Order. The male 
of an American cricket*’ is described as being as 
white as ivory, whilst the female varies from almost 
white to greenish-yellow or dusky. Mr. Walsh informs 
me that the adult male of Spectrum femoratwn (one of 
the Phasmidae) ‘‘is of a shining brownish-yellow 
“ colour ; the adult female being of a dull, opaque, 
“cinereous brown; the young of both sexes being 
“ green.” Lastly, I may mention that the male of 
one curious kind of cricket *® is furnished with “ a long 
“ membranous appendage, which falls over the face like 
‘‘ a veil ; ” but what its use may be, is not known. 

Order, Neuroptera . — Little need here be said, except 
as to colour. In the Ephemeridee the sexes often 

^ Westwood, ‘ Modern Class. land,’ 1842, p. 124. The two 
of Insects,’ vol. i. p. 427; for sexes of (Z7. of Europe 

crickets, p. 445. differ, as I hear from Victor 

Mr. Ch. Horne, in ‘ Proc. Cams, in nearly the same 
Ent. Soc.’ May 3, 1869, p. xii. manner. 

The (Ecanihus nivalis. '‘® Platyblemnus : Westwood, 
Harris, ‘ Insects of New Eng- ‘ Modern Class.’ vol. i. p. 447. 


Ohap. X. 


NEUBOPTERA. 


445 


differ slightly in their obscure tints ; but it is not 
probable that the males are thus rendered attractive 
to the females. The Libellulidae, or dragon-flies, are 
ornamented with splendid green, blue, yellow, and 
vermilion metallic tints; and the sexes often differ. 
Thus, as Prof. Westwood remarks,®® the males of some 
of the AgrionidflB, “ are of a rich blue with black wings, 
“ whilst the females are fine green with colourless 
‘‘wings.'’ But in Agrion BaTubu/rii these colours are 
exactly reversed in the two sexes.®^ In the extensive 
N. American genus of Hetaerina, the males alone have 
a beautiful carmine spot at the base of each wing. In 
Anaxjtmius the basal part of the abdomen in the male 
is a vivid ultramarine blue, and in the female grass- 
green. In the allied genus Gomphus, on the other 
hand, and in some other genera, the sexes differ but 
little in colour. In closely-allied forms throughout 
the animal kingdom, similar cases of the sexes differing 
greatly, or very little, or not at all, are of frequent 
occurrence. Although there is so wide a difference in 
colour betweeen the sexes of many Libelluiidae, it is 
often difficult to say which is the more brilliant ; and 
the ordinary coloration of the two sexes is reversed, as 
we have just seen, in one species of Agrion. It is not 
probable that their colours in any case have been 
gained as a protection. Mr. MacLachlan, who has 
closely attended to this family, writes to me that 
dragon-flies — the tyrants of the insect-world — are the 
least liable of any insect to be attacked by birds or 

" B. D. Walsh, the ‘ Pseudo- Walsh, ibid. p. 381. I am 

neuroptora of Illinois,’ in ‘ Proc. indebted to this naturalist for 

Ent. Soc. of Philadelphia,’ 1862, the following facts on Hetserina, 
p. 361. Anax, and Gomphus. 

^ ‘ Modern Class.’ vol. ii. p. 37. 


446 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


other enemies, and he believes that their bright colours 
serve as a sexual attraction. Certain dragon-flies 
apparently are attracted by particular colours: Mr. 
Patterson observed that the Agrionidae, of which the 
males are blue, settled in numbers on the blue float of 
a fishing line ; whilst two other species were attracted 
by shining white colours. 

It is an interesting fact, first noticed by Schelver, 
that, in several genera belonging to two sub-families, 
the males on first emergence from the pupal state, are 
coloured exactly like the females ; but that their 
bodies in a short time assume a conspicuous milky- 
blue tint, owing to the exudation of a kind of oil, 
soluble in ether and alcohol. Mr. MacLachlan believes 
that in the male of Libellula depressa this change of 
colour does not occur until nearly a fortnight after 
the metamorphosis, when the sexes are ready to pair. 

Certain species of Neurothemis present, according to 
Brauer,®^ a curious case of dimorphism, some of the 
females having ordinary wings, whilst others have 
them “ very richly netted, as in the males of the same 
“ species.” Brauer “ explains the phenomenon on 
“Darwinian principles by the supposition that the 
“ close netting of the veins is a secondary sexual 
“ character in the males, which has been abruptly 
“ transferred to some of the females, instead of, as 
“ generally occurs, to all of them.” Mr. MacLachlan 
informs me of another instance of dimorphism in 
several species of Agrion, in which some individuals 
are of an orange colour, and these are invariably 
females. This is probably a case of reversion ; for in 

“ ‘ Transact. Ent. Soc.’ vol. i. “ See abstract in the ‘ Zoo- 
1836, p. Ixxxi. logical Record ’ for 1867, p. 460. 


Chap. X. 


HYMENOPTERA. 


447 


the true Libellulfe, when the sexes differ in colour, the 
females are orange or yellow ; so that supposing 
Agrion to be descended from some primordial form 
which resembled the typical Libellulse in its sexual 
characters, it would not be surprising that a tendency 
to vary in this manner should occur in the females 
alone. 

Although many dragon-flies are large, powerful, and 
fierce insects, the males have not been observed by 
Mr. MacLachlan to fight together, excepting, as he 
believes, in some of the smaller species of Agrion. In 
another group in this Order, namely, the Termites 
or white ants, both sexes at the time of swarming may 
be seen running about, “ the male after the female, 
“ sometimes two chasing one female, and contending 
“ with great eagerness who shall win the prize.” 
The Atropos pulsatorius is said to make a noise with 
its jaws, which is answered by other individuals.^® 

Order, Eymenoptera . — That inimitable observer, M. 
Fabre,®® in describing the habits of Cerceris, a wasp- 
like insect, remarks that ‘'fights frequently ensue 
“ between the males for the possession of some par- 
“ ticular female, who sits an apparently unconcerned 
“beholder of the struggle for supremacy, and when 
“ the victory is decided, quietly flies away in company 
“ with the conqueror.” Westwood ®^ says that the males 
of one of the saw-flies (Tenthredinse) “ have been found 

“ Kirby and Sp'nce, ‘Intro- ‘The Writings of Fabre,’ in 
duct, to Entomology,’ vol. ii. ‘ Nat. Hist. Review,’ April 1862, 
1818, p. 35. p. 122. 

“ Houzeau, ‘ Les Facult^s ‘ Journal of Proc. of Ento- 

Mentales,’ &c. Tom. i. p. 104. molog. Soc.’ Sept. 7th, 1863, p. 

“ See an interesting article, 169. 


448 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part EL 


“ fighting together, with their mandibles locked.” As 
M. Fahre speaks of the males of Cerceris striving to 
obtain a particular female, it may be well to bear in 
mind that insects belonging to this Order have the 
power of recognising each other after long intervals 
of time, and are deeply attached. For instance, Pierre 
Huber, whose accuracy no one doubts, separated some 
ants, and when, after an interval of four months, they 
met others which had formerly belonged to the same 
community, they recognised and caressed one another 
with their antennae. Had they been strangers they 
would have fought together. Again, when two com- 
munities engage in a battle, the ants on the same 
side sometimes attack each other in the general con- 
fusion, but they soon perceive their mistake, and the 
one ant soothes the other.*^® 

In this Order slight differences in colour, according 
to sex, are common, hut conspicuous differences are 
rare except in the family of Bees; yet both sexes 
of certain groups are so brilliantly coloured — for 
instance in Chrysis, in which vermilion and metallic 
greens prevail — that we are tempted to attribute the 
result to sexual selection. In the Ichneumonidae, 
according to Mr. Walsh,®® the males are almost uni- 
versally lighter-coloured than the females. On the 
other hand, in the Tenthredinidse the males are gene- 
rally darker than the females. In the Siricidm the 
sexes frequently differ ; thus the male of Sirex 
juvencus is banded with orange, whilst the female is 
dark purple ; hut it is difficult to say which sex is the 

P. Huber, ‘ Kechercbes sur ‘ Proc. Entomolog. Soc. of 

les Moeurs des Fourmis,’ 1810, Philadelphia,’ 1866 pp. 238, 
pp. 150, 165. 239. 


Chap. X. 


HYMENOPTERA. 


449 


more ornamented. In Tremex columhm the female is 
much brighter coloured than the male. I am informed 
by Mr. F. Smith, that the male ants of several species 
are black, the females being testaceous. 

In the family of Bees, especially in the solitary 
species, as I hear from the same entomologist, the sexes 
often differ in colour. The males are generally the 
brighter, and in Bombus as well as in Apathus, much 
more variable in colour than the females. In Antlio- 
2)hora retusa the male is of a rich fulvous-brown, whilst 
the female is quite black : so are the females of several 
species of Xylocopa, the males being bright yellow. On 
the other hand the females of some species, as of An- 
drsena fulva, are much brighter coloured than the males. 
Such differences in colour can hardly be accounted for 
by the males being defenceless and thus requiring 
protection, whilst the females are well defended by 
their stings. H. Muller, who has particularly at- 
tended to the habits of bees, attributes these differences 
ill colour in chief part to sexual selection. That bees 
have a keen perception of colour is certain. He says 
that the males search eagerly and fight for the 
possession of the females ; and he accounts through 
such contests for the mandibles of the males being in 
certain species larger than those of the females. In 
some cases the males are far more numerous than 
the females, either early in the season, or at all times 
and places, or locally; whereas the females in other 
cases are apparently in excess. In some species the 
more beautiful males appear to have been selected by 
the females ; and in others the more beautiful females 

‘ Anwendung der Darwinschen Lehre auf Bienen.’ Verb, d 
n. Jahrg. xxix. 


450 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


by the males. Consequently in certain genera (Muller, 
p. 42), the males of the several species differ much in 
appearance, whilst the females are almost indistin- 
guishable ; in other genera the reverse occurs. H. 
Muller believes (p. 82) that the colours gained by one 
^ sex through sexual selection have often been trans- 
ferred in a variable degree to the other sex, just as the 
pollen-collecting apparatus of the female has often 
been transferred to the male, to whom it is absolutely 
useless.®^ 

Mutilla Europsea makes a stridulating noise ; and 
according to Goureau®^ both sexes have this power. 
He attributes the sound to the friction of the third and 
preceding abdominal segments, and I find that these 
surfaces are marked with very fine concentric ridges ; 
but so is the projecting thoracic collar into which the 
head articulates, and this collar, when scratched with 


M. Perrier in his article 
‘ la Selection sexuelle d’apr^s 
Darwin ’ (‘ Revue Scientifique,’ 
Feb. 1873, p. 868), without 
apparently having reflected 
much on the subject, objects 
that as the males of social bees 
are known to be produced from 
unfertilised ova, they could not 
transmit new characters to their 
male offs]iring. This is an 
extraordinary objection. A 
female bee fertilised by a male, 
which presented some character 
facilitating the union of the 
sexes, or rendering him more 
attractive to the female, would 
lay eggs which would produce 
only females; but these young 
females would next year produce 
males ; and will it be pretended 
that such males would not in- 


herit the characters of their 
male grandfathers ? To take a 
case with ordinary animals as 
nearly parallel as possible : if a 
female of any white quadruped 
or bird were crossed by a male 
of a black breed, and the male 
and female offspring were paired 
together, will it be pretended 
that the grandchildren would 
not inherit a tendency to black- 
ness from their male grandfather? 
The acquirement of new charac- 
ters by the sterile worker-b( es 
is a much more difficult case, but 
I have endeavoured to show in 
my ‘Origin of Species,’ how 
these sterile beings are subjected 
to the power of natural selection. 

Quoted by Westwood, 
‘Modern Class of Insects,’ voL 
ii. p. 214. 


Chai*. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


451 


the point of a needle, emits the proper sound. It is 
rather surprising that both sexes should have the 
power of stridulating, as the male is winged and the 
female wingless. It is notorious that Bees express 
certain emotions, as of anger, by the tone of their 
humming ; and according to H. Muller (p. 80), the 
males of some species make a peculiar singing noise 
whilst pursuing the females. 

Order, Coleoptera (Beetles). — Many beetles are 
coloured so as to resemble the surfaces which they habi- 
tually frequent, and they thus escape detection by their 
enemies. Other species, for instance diamond-beetles, 
are ornamented with splendid colours, which are often 
arranged in stripes, svots, crosses, and other elegant 
patterns. Such colours can hardly serve directly as a 
protection, except in the case of certain flower-feeding 
species ; but they may serve as a warning or means of 
recognition, on the same principle as the phosphores- 
cence of the glow-worm. As with beetles the colours 
of the two sexes are generally alike, we have no 
evidence that they have been gained through sexual 
selection; but this is at least possible, for they may 
have been developed in one sex and then transferred 
to the other ; and this view is even in some degree 
probable in those groups which possess other well- 
marked secondary sexual characters. Blind beetles, 
which cannot of course behold each other’s beauty, 
never, as I hear from Mr. Waterhouse, jun., exhibit 
bright colours, though they often have polished coats; 
but the explanation of their obscurity may be that they 
generally inhabit caves and other obscure stations. 

Some Longicorns, especiallv certain Prionidse, offer 


452 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


an exception to the rule that the sexes of beetles do not 
differ in colour. Most of these insects are large and 
splendidly coloured. The males in the genus Pyrodes/’ 
which I saw in Mr. Bates’s collection, are generally 
redder but rather duller than the females, the latter 
. being coloured of a more or less splendid golden-green. 
On the other hand, in one species the male is golden- 
green, the female being richly tinted with red and 
purple. In the genus Esmeralda the sexes differ so 
greatly in colour that they have been ranked as 
distinct species ; in one species both are of a beautiful 
shining green, but the male has a red thorax. On the 
whole, as far as I could judge, the females of those 
Prionidse, in which the sexes differ, are coloured more 
richly than the males, and this does not accord with 
the common rule in regard to colour, when acquired 
through sexual selection. 

A most remarkable distinction between the sexes ol 
many beetles is presented by the great horns which 
rise from the head, thorax, and clypeus of the males; 
and in some few cases from the under surface of the 


G3 Pyrodes pulcherrimus, iu 
which the sexes differ conspicu- 
ously, has been described by 
Mr. Bates in ‘ Transact. Ent. 
ISoc.’ 1869, p. 50. I will specify 
the few other cases in which 1 
have heard of a ditierence in 
colour between the sexes of 
beetles. Kirby and Spence 
(‘ Introduct. to Entomology,’ 
vol. iii. p. 301) mention a Can- 
tharis, Meloe, Rhagium, and the 
Leptura testacea; the male of 
the latter being testaceous, with 
a black thorax, and the female 
of a dull red all over. Q'hese 
two latter beetles belong to the 


family of Longicoms. Messis. 
R. Trimen and Waterhouse, 
jun., inform me of two Lamelli- 
corns, viz., a Peritrichia and 
Trichius, the male of the latter 
being more obscurely coloured 
then the female. In Tillus 
elongatus the male is black, and 
the female always, as it is 
believed, of a dark blue colour, 
with a red thorax. The male, 
also, of Orsodacna atra, as I 
hear from Mr. Walsh, is black, 
the female (the so-called 0. 
ruficolh's) having a rufous 
thorax. 


Chap. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


453 


body. These horns, in the great family of the Lamelli- 
corns, resemble those of various quadrupeds, such as 
stags, rhinoceroses, &c., and are wonderful both from 
their size and diversified shapes. Instead of describing 
them, I have given figures of the males and females of 
some of the more remarkable forms. (Figs. 16 to 20.) 
The females generally exhibit rudiments of the horns 
in the form of small knobs or ridges; but some are 
destitute of even the slightest rudiment. On the other 
hand, the horns are nearly as well developed in the 
female as in the male of Phanseus lancifer ; and only a 
little less well developed in the females of some other 
species of this genus and of Copris. I am informed by 
Mr. Bates that the horns do not differ in any manner 
corresponding with the more important characteristic 
differences between the several subdivisions of the 




Fig. IS. Chalcosomii atLis. Upper figure, male (reduced); lower figure, female 
(nat. size). 


454 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Fart IL 



Fig. 17. Copris isidis. (Left-band figures, males.) 



Fig, 18. PhaniEUS laumis. 



Fig. 19. 


Dipelicus cantor!. 




Fig ao. 


Outbophagus ranglfer, enlarged. 


Chap. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


455 


family : thus within the same section of the genus 
Onthophagus, there are species which have a single 
horn, and others which have two. 

In almost all cases, the horns are remarkable from 
their excessive variability ; so that a graduated series 
can be formed, from the most highly developed males 
to others so degenerate that they can barely be dis- 
tinguished from the females. Mr. Walsh found that 
in Phanaeus carnifex the horns were thrice as long in 
some males as in others. Mr. Bates, after examining 
above a hundred males of Onthophagus rangifer (fig. 
20), thought that he had at last discovered a species 
in which the horns did not vary ; but further research 
proved the contrary. 

The extraordinary size of the horns, and their widely 
different structure in closely-allied forms, indicate that 
they have been formed for some purpose; but their 
excessive variability in the males of the same species 
leads to the inference that this purpose cannot be of a 
definite nature. The horns do not show marks of 
friction, as if used for any ordinary work. Some 
authors suppose®® that as the males wander about 
much more than the females, they require horns as a 
defence against their enemies ; but as the horns are 
often blunt, they do not seem well adapted for defence. 
The most obvious conjecture is that they are used by 
the males for fighting together ; but the males have 
never been observed to fight ; nor could Mr. Bates, 
after a careful examination of numerous species, find 
any sufficient evidence, in their mutilated or broken 

“ ‘ Proc. Entomolog. tSoc. of duct. Entomolog.* vol. iii. p. 
Philadelphia,’ 1864, p. 228. 300. 

^ Kirby and Spence, ‘ Tntro- 


456 


THE DESCENT OF IMAN. 


Part IL 


condition, of their having been thus used. If the 
males had been habitual fighters, the size of their 
bodies would probably have been increased through 
sexual selection, so as to have exceeded that of the 
females; but Mr. Bates, after comparing the two sexes 
in above a hundred species of the Copridae, did not find 
any marked difference in this respect amongst w’'ell- 
developed individuals. In Lethrus, moreover, a beetle 
belonging to the same great division of the Lamelli- 
corns, the males are known to fight, but are not pro- 
vided with horns, though their mandibles are much 
larger than those of the female. 

The conclusion that the horns have been acquired 
as ornaments is that which best agrees with the fact 
of their having been so immensely, yet not fixedly, 
developed, — as shewn by their extreme variability in 
the same species, and by their extreme diversity in 
closely-allied species. This view will at first appear 
extremely improbable ; but we shall hereafter find 
with many animals standing much higher in the scale, 
namely fishes, amphibians, reptiles and birds, that 
various kinds of crests, knobs, horns and combs have 
been developed apparently for this sole purpose. 

The males of Onitis furcifev (fig. 21), and of some 
other species of the genus, are furnished with singular 
projections on their anterior femora, and with a great 
fork or pair of horns on the lower surface of the 
thorax. Judging from other insects, these may aid the 
male in clinging to the female. Although the males 
have not even a trace of a horn on the upper surface 
of the body, yet the females plainly exhibit a rudiment 
of a single horn on the head (fig. 22, a), and of a crest 
(b) on the thorax. That the slight thoracic crest in 


Chap. X. 


OOLEOPTERA. 


457 


the female is a rudiment of a projection proper to the 
male, though entirely absent in the male of this 
particular species, is clear : for the female of Bubas 
bison (a genus which comes next to Onitis) has a 



Fig. 21. Onitis furcifer, laterally. Right-hand figure, female, a. Rudiment of 

male viewed from bei cephalic horn. 5. Trace of thoracic horn or crest, 

nealh. 


similar slight crest on the thorax, and the male bears 
a great projection in the same situation. So, again, 
there can hardly be a doubt that the little point (a) on 
the head of the female Onitis furcifer, as well as on the 
head of the females of two or three allied species, 
is a rudimentary representative of the cephalic horn, 
which is common to the males of so many Lamellicorn 
beetles, as in Phanseus (fig. 1 8). 

The old belief that rudiments have been created to 
complete the scheme of nature is here so far from 
holding good, that we have a complete inversion of 
the ordinary state of things in the family. We may 
reasonably suspect that the males originally bore horns 
and transferred them to the females in a rudimentary 
condition, as in so many other Lamellicorns. Why the 
males subsequently lost their horns, we know not ; but 
this may have been caused through the principle of 
compensation, owing to the development of the large 
horns and projections on the lower surface : and as 


458 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


these are confined to the males, the rudiments of the 
upper horns on the females would not have been thus 
obliterated. 

The cases hitherto given refer to the Lamellicorns, 
but the males of some few other beetles, belonging to 
'two widely distinct groups, namely, the Curculionidse 
and Staphylinidae, are furnished with horns — in the 
former on the lower surface of the body,®® in the latter 
on the upper surface of the head and thorax. In the 
Staphylinidae, the horns of the males are extraordinarily 
variable in the same species, just as we have seen with 
the Lamellicorns. In Siagonium we have a case of 
dimorphism, for the males can be divided into two sets, 
differing greatly in the size of their bodies and in the 



Fig. 23. Bledius taurus, magnified. Left-hand figure, male ; right-hand figure, female. 


development of their horns, without intermediate 
gradations. In a species of Bledius (fig. 23), also 
belonging to the Staphylinidae, Professor Westwood 
states that, “ male specimens can be found in the same 
“ locality in which the central horn of the thorax is 
very large, but the horns of the head quite rudimen- 
“ tal ; and others, in which the thoracic horn is much 
“ shorter, whilst the protuberances on the head are 
“ long.” ®’ Here we apparently have a case of compeii- 

“ Kirby and Spence, ‘ Intro- nium, p. 172. In the British 

duct. Entomolog.’ vol. iii. p. Museum I noticed one male 

329. specimen of Siagonium in an 

” ‘Modern ClassiBcation of intermediate condition, so that 
Insects,’ vol. i. p. 172 : Siago- the dimorphism is not strict. 


Chap. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


459 


sdtion, which throws light on that just given, of the 
supposed loss of the upper horns by the males of Onitis. 

Lair of Battle . — Some male beetles, which seem ill- 
fitted for fighting, nevertheless engage in conflicts for 
the possession of the females. Mr. Wallace saw two 
males of Leptorhynchus angustatus^ a linear beetle with 
a much elongated rostrum, “ fighting for a female, who 
“ stood close by busy at her boring. They pushed at 
“ each other with their rostra, and clawed and thumped, 
“ apparently in the greatest rage.” The smaller male, 
however, “ soon ran away, acknowledging himself 
“ vanquished.” In some few cases male beetles are well 
adapted for fighting, by possessing great toothed 
mandibles, much larger than those of the females. 
This is the case with the common stag-beetle (Lucanus 
cervus), the males of which emerge from the pupal 
state about a week before the other sex, so that several 
may often be seen pursuing the same female. At this 
season they engage in fierce conflicts. When Mr. A. 
H. Davis enclosed two males with one female in a 
box, the larger male severely pinched the smaller one, 
until he resigned his pretensions. A friend informs 
me that when a boy he often put the males together to 
see them fight, and he noticed that they were much 
bolder and fiercer than the females, as with the higher 
animals. The males would seize hold of his finger, if 
held in front of them, but not so the females, although 
they have stronger jaws. The males of many of the 
Lucanidae, as well as of the above-mentioned Leptorhyn- 

‘ The Malay Archipelago,’ vol. i. 1833, p. 82. See also on 
vol. ii. 1869, p. 276. Riley, the conflicts of this species. 
Sixth ‘ Report on insects of Kirby and Spence, ibid. vol. iii. 
Missouri,’ 1874, p. 115. p. 314 ; and Westwood, ibid. 

‘ Entomological Magazine,’ vol. i. p. 187. 


460 THE DESCENT OE MAN. Eart II. 

chus, are larger and more powerful insects than the 
females. The two sexes of Lethrus cephalotes (one of 
the Lamellicorns) inhabit the same burrow ; and the 
male has larger mandibles than the female. If, during 
the breeding season, a strange male attempts to enter 
the burrow, he is attacked ; the female does not remain 
passive, but closes the mouth of the burrow, and en- 
courages her mate by continually pushing him on from 
behind ; and the battle lasts until the aggressor is killed 
or runs away.’® The two sexes of another Lamellicorn 
beetle, the Ateuchus cicatricosus, live in pairs, and seem 
much attached to each other ; the male excites the 
females to roll the balls of dung in which the ova are 
deposited ; and if she is removed, he becomes much 
agitated. If the male is removed the female ceases all 
work, and as M. Brulerie believes, would remain on 
the same spot until she died. 

The great mandibles of the male Lucanidm are 
extremely variable both in size and structure, and in 
this respect resemble the horns on the head and thorax 
of many male Lamellicorns and Staphylinidse. A 
perfect series can be formed from the best-provided to 
the worst-provided or degenerate males. Although the 
mandibles of the common stag-beetle, and probably of 
many other species, are used as efficient weapons for 
lighting, it is doubtful whether their great size can 
thus be accounted’ for. We have seen that they are 
used by the Lucanus elaphus of N. America for seiz- 
ing the female. As they are so conspicuous and so 
elegantly branched, and as owing to their great length 

Quoted Irom Fischer, in France,’ 1866, as quoted in 

‘Diet. Class. d’Hist. Nat.’ tom. ‘Journal of Travel,* by A. 

X. p. 324. Murray, 1868, p. 135. 

‘ Ann. Soc. Entomolog. 


Chap. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


461 


they are not well adapted for pinching, the suspicion 
has crossed my mind that they may in addition serve 
as an ornament, like the horns on 
the head and thorax of the various 
species above described. The 
male Ghiasognathus Grantii of S. 

Chile — a splendid beetle belong- 
ing to the same family — has enor- 
mously developed mandibles (fig. 

24) ; he is bold and pugnacious ; 
when threatened he faces round, 
opens his great jaws, and at the 
same time stridulates loudly. But 
the mandibles were not strong 
enough to pinch my finger so as 
to cause actual pain. 

Sexual selection, which implies 
the possession of considerable per- 
ceptive powers and of strong 
passions, seems to have been more 
efiective with the Lamellicorns 
than with any other family of 
beetles. With some species the 
males are provided with weapons 
for fighting ; some live in pairs 
and show mutual afiection ; many 
have the power of stridulating 
when excited ; many are furnished 
with the most extraordinary 
horns, apparently for the sake of 
ornament ; and some, which are 
diurnal in their habits, are gorgeously coloured. 
Lastly, several of the largest beetles in the world 



Fig. 24. Ghiasognathus Grantii, 
reduced. Upp'.r figure, male ; 
lower figure, female. 


462 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


belong to this family, which was placed by Linnaeus 
and Fabricius at the head of the Order. 

Stridulating organs . — Beetles belonging to many 
and widely distinct families possess these organs. 
The sound thus produced can sometimes be heard at 
the distance of several feet or even yards/^ but it is 
not comparable with that made by the Orthoptera. 
The rasp generally consists of a narrow, slightly- 
raised surface, crossed by very fine, parallel ribs, 
sometimes so fine as to cause iridescent colours, and 
having a very elegant appearance under the micro- 
scope. In some cases, as with Typhoeus, minute, 
bristly or scale-like prominences, with which the whole 
surrounding surface is covered in approximately 
parallel lines, could be traced passing into the ribs of 
the rasp. The transition takes place by their be- 
coming confluent and straight, and at the same time 
more prominent and smooth. A hard ridge on an 
adjoining part of the body serves as the scraper for 
the rasp, but this scraper in some cases has been 
specially modified for the purpose. It is rapidly 
moved across the rasp, or conversely the rasp across 
the scraper. 

These organs are situated in widely different posi- 
tions. In the carrion-beetles (Necrophorus) two 
parallel rasps (r, fig. 2 )) stand on the dorsal surface 
of the fifth abdominal segment, each rasp consisting 
of 126 to 140 fine ribs. These ribs are scraped against 
the posterior margins of the elytra, a small portion 

Westwood, ‘ Modern Class.* 1860, p. 14. 
vol. i. p. 184. Landois, ‘ Zeitschrift fiir 

Wollaston, ‘On certain wiss. Zoolog.’ B. xvii. 1867, a. 
Musical Curculionidas,’ ‘Annals 127, 
and Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ vol. vi. 


Chap. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


463 


of which projects beyond the general outline. In 
many Crioceridse, and in Glythra 4:~pimctafa (one of the 
Chrysomelidm), and in some Tenebrionidas, &c./® the 
rasp is seated on the dorsal apex of the abdomen, on 
the pygidium or pro-pygidium, and is scraped in the 
same manner by the elytra. In Heterocerus, which 
belongs to another family, the rasps are placed on the 
sides of the first abdominal segment, and are scraped 
by ridges on the femora.^® In certain Curculionidae 



Fig. 25 . Necrophoius (from Landois). r. The two rasps. Left-hand figure, part cf 
the rasp highl}' magnified. 


and Carabidse,’’ the parts are completely reversed in 
position, for the rasps are seated on the inferior surface 


I am greatly indebted to 
!Mr. G. R. Crotch for having 
sent me many prepared speci- 
mens of various beetles belong- 
ing to these three families and 
to others, as well as for valuable 
information. He believes that 
the power of stridulation in the 
Clythra has not been previously 
observed. I am also much in- 
debted to Mr. E. W. Janson, 
for information and specimens. 
J may add that my son, Mr. F. 
Darwin, finds that Dermestes 
murinus stridulates, but he 
searched in vain for the ap- 
]>aratu8. Scolytus has lately 
been described by Dr. Chapman 
as a stridulator, in the ‘ Entomo- 


logist’s Monthly Magazine,’ vol. 
vi. p. 130. 

Schibdte, translated in 
‘ Aunals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ 
vol. XX. 1867, p. 37. 

^ Westring has described 
(Kroyer, ‘ Naturhist. Tidskrift,’ 
B. ii. 1848-49, p. 334) the 
stridulating organs in these two, 
as well as in other families. In 
the Carabidae I have examined 
Elaphrus ulvjinosus and Blethisa 
muUipunctata, sent to me by Mr. 
Crotch. In Blethisa the trans- 
verse ridges on the furrowed 
border of the abdominal seg- 
ment do not, as far as I could 
judge, come into play in 
scraping the rasps on the elytra. 



4CA 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part n. 


of the elytra, near their apices, or along their outer 
margins, and the edges of the abdominal segments 
serve as the scrapers. In Feldbius Hermanni (one of 
Dytiscidae or water-beetles) a strong ridge runs parallel 
and near to sutural margin of the elytra, and is 
crossed by ribs, coarse in the middle part, but be- 
coming gradually finer at both ends, especially at the 
upper end ; when this insect is held under water or in 
the air, a stridulating noise is produced by the extreme 
^ horny margin of the abdomen being 

scraped against the rasps. In a great 
number of long-horned beetles (Longi- 
cornia) the organs are situated quite 
otherwise, the rasp being on the meso- 
thorax, which is rubbed against the 
pro-thorax ; Landois counted 238 very 
fine ribs on the rasp of Ceramhyx heros. 

Many Lamellicorns have the power 
of stridulating, and the organs difi’er 
greatly in position. Some species stri- 
Fi«. 26. Hind-leg of dulatc vcry loudly, so that when Mr. 

F. Smith caught a Trox sabulosus, a 
/! Femur, t Tib?a.’ gamekeeper, who stood by, thought 
he had caught a mouse; but I faile'd 
to discover the proper organs in this beetle. In Geo- 
trupes and Typhoeus, a narrow ridge runs obliquely 
across (r, fig. 26) the coxa of each hind-leg (having 
in G. stercorarius 84 ribs), which is scraped by a 
specially projecting part of one of the abdominal seg- 
ments. In the nearly allied Goj^ris lunaris, an exces- 
sively narrow fine rasp runs along the sutural margin 
of the elytra, with another short rasp near the basal 
outer margin ; but in some other Coprini the rasp is 



Chap. X 


COLEOPTERA. 


465 


seated, according to Leconte,’® on the dorsal surface of 
the abdomen. In Oryctes it is seated on the pro- 
pygidium; and, according to the same entomologist, 
in some other Dynastini, on the under surface of the 
elytra. Lastly, Westring states that in Omalo'plia 
hrunnea the rasp is placed on the pro-sternum, and the 
scraper on the meta-sternum, the parts thus occupying 
the under surface of the body, instead of the upper 
surface as in the Longicorns. 

We thus see that in the different coleopterous 
families the stridulating organs are wonderfully 
diversified in position, but not much in structure. 
Within the same family some species are provided 
with these organs, and others are destitute of them. 
This diversity is intelligible, if we suppose that 
originally various beetles made a shuffling or hissing 
noise by the rubbing together of any hard and rough 
parts of their bodies, which happened to be in contact ; 
and that from the noise thus produced being in some 
way useful, the rough surfaces were gradually de- 
veloped into regular stridulating organs. Some 
beetles as they move, now produce, either intention- 
ally or unintentionally, a shuffling noise, without 
possessing any proper organs for the purpose. Mr. 
Wallace informs me that the Euehirus longimanus (a 
Lamellicorn, with the anterior legs wonderfully 
elongated in the male) “ makes, whilst moving, a low 
“hissing sound by the protrusion and contraction of 
“ the abdomen ; and when seized it produces a grating 
“ sound by rubbing its hind-legs against the edges of 

I am indebted to Mr. ‘Introduction to Entomology,* 
Walsh, of Illinois, for having pp. 101, 143. 
sent me extracts from Leconte’s 

2 H 


466 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


“ the elytra.” The hissing sound is clearly due to a 
narrow rasp running along the sutural margin of each 
elytron ; and I could likewise make the grating sound 
by rubbing the shagreened surface of the femur against 
the granulated margin of the corresponding elytron ; 
but I could not here detect any proper rasp ; nor is it 
likely that I could have overlooked it in so large an 
insect. After examining Cychrus, and reading what 
Westring has written about this beetle, it seems very 
doubtful whether it possesses any true rasp, though it 
has the power of emitting a sound. 

From the analogy of the Orthoptera and Homoptera, 
I expected to find the stridulating organs in the 
Coleoptera differing according to sex ; but Landois, 
who has carefully examined several species, observed 
no such difference ; nor did Westring ; nor did Mr. G-. 
R Crotch in preparing the many specimens which he 
had the kindness to send me. Any difference in these 
organs, if slight, would, however, be difficult to detect, 
on account of their great variability. Thus, in the first 
pair of specimens of Necrophorus humator and of Pelobius 
which I examined, the rasp was considerably larger in 
the male than in the female ; but not so with suc- 
ceeding specimens. In Geotrupes stercorarius the rasp 
appeared to me thicker, opaquer, and more prominent 
in three males than in the same number of females ; 
in order, therefore, to discover whether the sexes 
differed in their power of stridulating, my son, Mr. F. 
Darwin, collected fifty-seven living specimens, which 
he separated into two lots, according as they made a 
greater or lesser noise, when held in the same manner. 
He then examined all these specimens, and found that 
the males were very nearly in the same proportion 


Chap. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


4H7 

to the females in both the lots. Mr. F. Smith has 
kept alive numerous specimens of Monoynchus pseuda- 
cori (Curculionidae), and is convinced that both sexes 
stridulate, and apparently in an equal degree. 

Nevertheless, the power of stridulating is certainly 
a sexual character in some few Coleoptera. Mr. Crotch 
discovered that the males alone of two species of 
Heliopathes (Tenebrionidae) possess stridulating organs. 
I examined five males of £T. gihbus, and in all these 
there was a well-developed rasp, partially divided into 
two, on the dorsal surface of the terminal abdominal 
segment ; whilst in the same number of females there 
was not even a rudiment of the rasp, the membrane of 
this segment being transparent, and much thinner 
than in the male. In H. cribratostriatus the male has 
a similar rasp, excepting that it is not partially divided 
into two portions, and the female is completely desti- 
tute of this organ; the male in addition has on the 
apical margins of the elytra, on each side of the suture, 
three or four short longitudinal ridges, which are 
crossed by extremely fine ribs, parallel to and re- 
sembling those on the abdominal rasp ; whether these 
ridges serve as an independent rasp, or as a scraper for 
the abdominal rasp, I could not decide ; the female 
exhibits no trace of this latter structure. 

Again, in three species of the Lamellicorn genus 
Oryctes, we have a nearly parallel case. In the females 
of 0. gryplius and nasicornis the ribs on the rasp of the 
pro-pygidium are less continuous and less distinct than 
in the males ; but the chief difference is that the wliole 
upper surface of tliis segment, when held in the proper 
light, is seen to be clothed with hairs, which are absent 
or are represented by excessively fine down^ in the 


468 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


males. It should he noticed that in all Coleoptera the 
effective part of the rasp is destitute of hairs. In 0. 
senegalensis the difference between the sexes is more 
strongly marked, and this is best seen when the proper 
abdominal* segment is cleaned and viewed as a trans- 
^ parent object. In the female the whole surface is 
covered with little separate crests, hearing spines ; 
whilst in the male these crests in proceeding towards 
the apex, become more and more confluent, regular, 
and naked ; so that three-fourths of the segment is 
covered with extremely fine parallel ribs, which are 
quite absent in the female. In the females, however, 
of all three species of Oryctes, a slight grating or 
stridulating sound is produced, when the abdomen of a 
softened specimen is pushed backwards and forwards. 

In the case of the Heliopathes and Oryctes there can 
hardly he a doubt that the males stridulate in order to 
call or to excite the females ; hut with most beetles 
the stridulation apparently serves both sexes as a 
mutual call. Beetles stridulate under various emotions, 
in the same manner as birds use their voices for many 
purposes besides singing to their mates. The great 
Chiasognathus stridulates in anger or defiance ; many 
species do the same from distress or fear, if held so 
that they cannot escape ; by striking the hollow stems 
of trees in the Canary Islands, Messrs. Wollaston and 
Crotch were able to discover the presence of beetles 
belonging to the genus Acalles by their stridulation. 
Lastly, the male Ateuchus stridulates to encourage the 
female in her work, and from distress when she is 
removed. Some naturalists believe that beetles make 

M. P. de la Brulerie, as quoted in ‘ Journal of Travel,’ A. 
Murray, wol. i. 1868, p. 135. 


. Chap. X. 


COLEOPTERA. 


469 


this noise to frighten away their enemies ; but I can- 
not think that a quadruped or bird, able to devour a 
large beetle, would be frightened by so slight a sound. 
The belief that the stridulation serves as a sexual call 
is supported by the fact that death-ticks (Anohium 
iessellcUum) are well known to answer each other’s 
ticking, and, as I have myself observed, a tapping noise 
artificially made. Mr. Doubleday also informs me that 
he has sometimes observed a female ticking,®® and in 
an hour or two afterwards has found her united with a 
male, and on one occasion surrounded by several males. 
Finally, it is probable that the two sexes of many kinds 
of beetles were at first enabled to find each other by 
the slight shufiling noise produced by the rubbing 
together of the adjoining hard parts of their bodies ; 
and that as those males or females which made the 
greatest noise succeeded best in finding partners, 
rugosities on various parts of their bodies were gradu- 
ally developed by means of sexual selection into true 
stridulating organs. 


According to Mr. Double- 
day, “ the noise is produced by 
“ the insect raising itself on its 
“ legs as high as it can, and then 
“ striking its thorax five or six 
“ times, in rapid succession, 
“ against the substance upon 
“ which it is sitting.” For 
references on this subject see 
Landois, ‘Zeitschrift fiir wissen. 


Zoolog.’ B. xvii. s. 131. Olivier 
says (as quoted by Kirby and 
Spence, ‘Introduct.’ vol. ii. p. 
395) that the female of Pimelia 
striata produces a rather loud 
sound by striking her abdomen 
against any hard substance, 
“and that the male, obedient 
“ to this call, soon attends her, 
“ and they pair.” 


470 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


CHAPTER XI 

Insects, continued . — Order Lepidoptera. 
(butterflies and moths.) 

Courtship of butterflies — Battles — Ticking noise — Colours common 
to both sexes, or more brilliant in the males — l'>xamples — Not 
due to the direct action of the conditions of life — Colours adapted 
for protection — Colours of moths — Display — Perceptive powers 
of the Lepidoptera — Variability — Causes of the difterence in 
colour between the males and females — Mimicry, female butter- 
flies more brilliantly coloured than the males — Bright colom-s of 
caterpillars— Summary and concluding remarks on the secondai’}- 
sexual characters of insects — Birds and insects compared. 

In this great Order the most interesting points for us 
are the differences in colour between the sexes of the 
same species, and between the distinct species of the 
same genus. Nearly the whole of the following chap- 
ter will he devoted to this subject ; but I will first 
make a few remarks on one or two other points. 
Several males may often be seen pursuing and crowding 
round the same female. Their courtship appears to be 
a prolonged affair, for I have frequently watched one 
or more males pirouetting round a female until I was 
tired, without seeing the end of the courtship. Mr. 
A. G. Butler also informs me that he has several times 
watched a male courting a female for a full quarter of 
an hour ; but she pertinaciously refused him, and at 


Chap. XI. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


471 


last settled on the ground and closed her wings, so as 
to escape from his addresses. 

Although butterflies are weak and fragile creatures, 
they are pugnacious, and an Emperor butterfly ^ has 
been captured with the tips of its wings broken from 
a conflict with another male. Mr. Collingwood, in 
speaking of the frequent battles between the butterflies 
of Borneo, says, “ They whirl round each other with 
“ the greatest rapidity, and appear to be incited by the 
“ greatest ferocity.” 

The Ageronia feronia makes a noise like that pro- 
duced by a toothed wheel passing under a spring catch, 
and which can be heard at the distance of several 
yards: I noticed this sound at Kio de Janeiro, only 
when two of these butterflies were chasing each other 
in an irregular course, so that it is probably made 
during the courtship of the sexes.^ 

Some moths also produce sounds; for instance, the 
males of Thecophora fovea. ' On two occasions Mr. F. 
Buchanan White ® heard a sharp quick noise made by 
the male of Hylophila prasinana, and which he believes 
to be produced, as in Cicada, by an elastic membrane, 
furnished with a muscle. He quotes, also, Guenee, 
that Setina produces a sound like the ticking of a 
watch, apparently by the aid of “ two large tympani- 


^ Apatura Iris : ‘ The Ento- 
mologist’s Weekly Intelligence,’ 
1859, p. 139. For the Bornean 
Buttertlies, see C. Collingwood, 
‘ Rambles of a Naturalist,’ 1868, 
p. 183. 

® See my ‘Journal of Re- 
searches,’ 1845, p. 33. Mr. 
Doubleday has detected (‘ Proc. 
Ent. Soc.’ March 3rd, 1845, p. 
123) a peculiar membranous sac 


at the base of the front wings, 
which is probably connected 
with the production of the sound. 
For the case of Thecophora, 
see ‘ Zoological Record,’ 1869, 
p. 401. For Mr. Buchanan 
White’s observations, ‘ The 
Scottish Naturalist,’ July 1872, 
p. 214. 

* ‘ The Scottish Naturalist,’ 
July 1872, p. 213, 


472 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


“ form vesicles, situated in the pectoral region ; ” and 
these “ are much more developed in the male than in 
“ the female.” Hence the sound-producing organs in 
the Lepidoptera appear to stand in some relation with 
the sexual functions. I have not alluded to the well- 
known noise made by the Death’s Head Sphinx, for it 
is generally heard soon after the moth has emerged 
from its cocoon. 

Giard has always observed that the musky odour, 
which is emitted by two species of Sphinx moths, is 
peculiar to the males ; ^ and in the higher classes we 
shall meet with many instances of the males alone 
being odoriferous. 

Every one must have admired the extreme beauty of 
many butterflies and of some moths ; and it may, be 
asked, are their colours and diversifled patterns the 
result of the direct action of the physical conditions 
to which these insects have been exposed, without 
any beneflt being thus derived ? Or have successive 
variations been accumulated and determined as a 
protection, or for some unknown purpose, or that one 
sex may be attractive to the other ? And, again, what 
is the meaning of the colours being widely different in 
the males and females of certain species, and alike in 
the two sexes of other species of the same genus ? 
Before attempting to answer these questions a body of 
facts must be given. 

With our beautiful English butter Hies, the admiral, 
peacock, and painted lady (Vanessae), as well as many 
others, the sexes are alike. This is also the case with 
the magnificent Heliconidee, and most of the Danaidm 
in the tropics. But in certain other tropical groups, 
* ‘Zoological Record,’ 1869, p. 347. 


Chap. XI. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


473 


and in some of our English butterflies, as the purple 
emperor, orange-tip, &c. (Apatura Iris and Anthocharis 
cardamines), the sexes differ either greatly or slightly 
in colour. No language suffices to describe the splen- 
dour of the males of some tropical species. Even 
within the same genus we often find species presenting 
extraordinary differences between the sexes, whilst 
others have their sexes closely alike. Thus in the 
South American genus Epicalia, Mr. Bates, to whom I 
am indebted for most of the following facts, and -for 
looking over this whole discussion, informs me that he 
knows twelve species, the two sexes of which haunt 
the same stations (and this is not always the case with 
butterflies), and which, therefore, cannot have been 
differently affected by external conditions.^ In nine 
of these twelve species the males rank amongst the most 
brilliant of all butterflies, and differ so greatly from 
the comparatively plain females that they were formerly 
placed in distinct genera. The females of these nine 
species resemble each other in their general type of 
coloration; and they likewise resemble both sexes of 
the species in several allied genera, found in various 
parts of the world. Hence we may infer that there 
nine species, and probably all the others of the genus, 
are descended from an ancestral form which was 
coloured in nearly the same manner. In the tenth 
species the female still retains the same general 
colouring, but the male resembles her, so that he is 
coloured in a much less gaudy and contrasted manner 
than the males of the previous species. In the eleventh 

® See also Mr. Bates’s paper regard to Diadema, in ‘ 1 ransack 
in ‘ Proc. Ent. Soc. of Philadel- Entomolog. Soc. of London, 
phia,’ 1865, p. 206. Also Mr. 1869, p. 278. 

Wallace on the same subject, in 


474 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IT 


and, twelfth species, the females depart from the usual 
type, for they are gaily decorated almost like the males, 
hut iu a somewhat less degree. Hence in these two 
latter species the bright colours of the males seem to 
have been transferred to the females ; whilst in the 
tenth species the male has either retained or recovered 
the plain colours of the female, as well as of the parent- 
form of the genus. The sexes in these three cases 
have thus been rendered nearly alike, though in an 
opposite manner. In the allied genus Euhagis, both 
sexes of some of the species are plain-coloured and 
nearly alike ; whilst with the greater number the males 
are decorated with beautiful metallic tints in a diversi- 
fied manner, and differ much from their females. The 
females throughout the genus retain the same general 
style of colouring, so that they resemble one another 
much more closely than they resemble their own males. 

In the genus Papilio, all the species of the ^Eneas 
group are remarkable for their conspicuous and 
strongly contrasted colours, and they illustrate the 
frequent tendency to gradation in the amount of differ- 
ence between the sexes. In a few species, for instance 
in P. aseanius, the males and females are alike ; in 
others the males are either a little brighter, or very 
much more superb than the females. The genus 
Junonia, allied to our Yanessae, ofters a nearly parallel 
case, for although the sexes of most of the species 
resemble each other, and are destitute of rich colours, 
yet in certain species, as in J. oenone, the male is rather 
more bright- coloured than the female, and in a few 
ffor instance J. andremiaja) the male is so different 
from the female that he might be mistaken for an 
entirely distinct species. 


Ohap. \I. . BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


475 


Another striking case was pointed out to me in the 
British Museum hy Mr. A. Butler, namely, one of tlie 
tropical American Theclse, in which both sexes are 
nearly alike and wonderfully splendid; in another 
species the male is ‘ coloured in a similarly gorgeous 
manner, whilst the whole upper surface of the female 
is of a dull uniform brown. Our common little English 
blue butterflies of the genus Lycaena, illustrate the 
various difierences in colour between the sexes, almost 
as well, though not in so striking a manner, as the 
above exotic genera. In Lycsena agestis both sexes 
have wings of a brown colour, bordered with small 
ocellated orange spots, and are thus alike. In L. oegon 
the wings of the male are of a fine blue, bordered with 
black, whilst those of the female are brown, with a 
similar border, closely resembling the wings of L. agestis. 
Lastly, in L. avion both sexes are of a blue colour and 
are very like, though in the female the edges of the 
wings are rather duskier, with the black spots plainer ; 
and in a bright blue Indian species both sexes are still 
more alike. 

I have given the foregoing details in order to show, 
in the first place, that when the sexes of butterflies 
differ, the male as a general rule is the more beautiful, 
and departs more from the usual type of colouring of 
the group to which the species belongs. Hence in 
most groups the females of the several species resemble 
each other much more closely than do the males. In 
some cases, however, to w^hich I shall hereafter allude, 
the females are coloured more splendidly than the 
males. In the second place, these details have been 
given to bring clearly before the mind that within the 
same genus, the two sexes frequently present every 


476 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


gradation from no difference in colour, to so great a 
difference that it was long before the two were placed 
by entomologists in the same genus. In the third place, 
we have seen that when the sexes nearly resemble each 
other, this appears due either to the male having 
transferred his colours to the female, or to the male 
having retained, or perhaps recovered, the primordial 
colours of the group. It also deserves notice that in 
those groups in which the sexes differ, the females 
usually somewhat resemble the males, so that when the 
males are beautiful to an extraordinary degree, the 
females almost invariably exhibit some degree of beauty. 
From the many cases of gradation in the amount of 
difference between the sexes, and from the prevalence 
of the same general type of coloration throughout 
the whole of the same group, we may conclude 
that the causes have generally been the same which 
have determined the brilliant colouring of the males 
alone of some species, and of both sexes of other 
species. 

As so many gorgeous butterflies inhabit the tropics, 
it has often been supposed that they owe their colours 
to the great heat and moisture of these zones ; hut Mr. 
Bates® has shown by the comparison of various closely- 
allied groups of insects from the temperate and tropical 
regions, that this view cannot be maintained ; and the 
evidence becomes conclusive when brilliantly-coloured 
males and plain-coloured females of the same species 
inhabit the same district, feed on the same food, and 
follow exactly the same habits of life. Even when the 
sexes resemble each other, we can hardly believe that 
their brilliant and beautifully-arranged colours are the 
® ‘The Naturalist on the Amazons,’ vol. i. 1863, p. 19. 


Chap. XL 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


477 


purposeless result of the nature of the tissues and of 
the action of the surrounding conditions. 

With animals of all kinds, whenever colour has been 
modified for some special purpose, this has been, as far 
as we can judge, either for direct or indirect protection, 
or as an attraction between the sexes. With many 
species of butterflies the upper surfaces of the wings 
are obscure ; and this in* all probability leads to their 
escaping observation and danger. But butterflies 
would be particularly liable to be attacked by their 
enemies when at rest ; and most kinds whilst resting 
raise their wings vertically over their backs, so that 
the lower surface alone is exposed to view. Hence it 
is this side which is often coloured so as to imitate the 
objects on which these insects commonly rest. Dr. 
Bossier, I believe, first noticed the similarity of the 
closed wings of certain Vanessae and other butterflies 
to the bark of trees. Many analogous and striking 
facts could be given. The most interesting one is that 
recorded by Mr. Wallace’ of a common Indian and 
Sumatran butterfly (Kallima), which disappears like 
magic when it settles on a bush ; for it hides its head 
and antennae between its closed wings, which, in form, 
colour and veining, cannot be distinguished from a 
withered leaf with its footstalk. In some other cases 
the lower surfaces of the wings are brilliantly coloured, 
and yet are protective ; thus in Theda ruhi the wings 
when closed are of an emerald green, and resemble the 
young leaves of the bramble, on which in spring this 
butterfly may often be seen seated. It is also remark- 

See the interesting article in Kallima is given by Mr. Wallace 
the * Westminster Review,’ July in ‘.Hardwicke’s Science Grossip,’ 
18G7, p. 10. A woodcut of the Sept. 1867, p. 196. 


478 


T!IE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


able that in very many species in which the sexes differ 
greatly in colour on their upper surface, the lower sur- 
face is closely similar or identical in both sexes, and 
serves as a protection.® 

Although the obscure tints both of the upper and 
under sides of many butterflies no doubt serve to 
conceal them, yet we cannot extend this view to the 
brilliant and conspicuous colours on the upper surface 
of such species as our admiral and peacock Vanessae, 
our white cabbage-butterflies (Pieris), or the great 
swallow-tail Papilio which haunts the open fens — for 
these butterflies are thus rendered visible to every 
living creature. In these species both sexes are alike ; 
but in the common brimstone butterfly {Goriepteryx 
rhamni), the male is of an intense yellow, whilst the 
female is much paler; and in the orange-tip (Antho- 
charis cardamines) the males alone have their wings 
tipped with bright orange. Both the males and 
females in these cases are conspicuous, and it is not 
credible that their difference in colour should stand in 
any relation to ordinary protection. Prof. Weismann 
remarks,^ that the female of one of the Lycaenae expands 
her brown wings when she settles on the ground, and 
is then almost invisible ; the male, on the other hand, 
as if aware of the danger incurred from the^ bright 
blue of the upper surface of his wings, rests with them 
closed ; and this shows that the blue colour cannot be 
in any way protective. Ne.vertheless; it is probable 
that conspicuous colours are indirectly beneficial to 
many species, as a warning that they are unpalatable. 
For in certain other cases, beauty lias been gained 

" Mr. G. Fraser, in ‘ Nature,’ ® ‘ Eiiifluss der Isoliiung au 
April 1871 p. 489. di. Artbildung,’ 1872, p. 58. 


Chap. XI. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


479 


through the imitation of other beautiful species, which 
inhabit the same district and enjoy an immunity from 
attack by being in some way offensive to their enemies ; 
but then we have to account for the beauty of the 
imitated species. 

As Mr. Walsh has remarked to me, the females of 
our orange-tip butterfly, above referred to, and of an 
American species {Anth. genutia) probably show us the 
primordial colours of the parent-species of the genus ; 
for both sexes of four or five widely-distributed species 
are coloured in nearly the same manner. As in several 
previous cases, we may here infer that it is the males 
of Anth. cardamines and genutia which have departed 
from the usual type of the genus. In the Anth. sara 
from California, the orange-tips to the wings have been 
partially developed in the female ; but they are paler 
than in the male, and slightly different in some other 
respects. In an allied Indian form, the Iphias glau- 
cippe^ the orange-tips are fully developed in both sexes. 
In this Iphias, as pointed out to me by Mr. A. Butler, 
the under surface of the wings marvellously resembles 
a pale-coloured leaf; and in our English orange-tip, 
the under surface resembles the flower-head of the wild 
parsley, on which the butterfly often rests at night.^® 
The same reason which compels us to believe that the 
lower surfaces have here been coloured for the sake of 
protection, leads us to deny that the wings have been 
tipped with bright orange for the same purpose, 
especially when this character is confined to the males. 

Most Moths rest motionless during the whole or 
greater part of the day with their wings depressed ; 

“ See the interesting observations by Mr. T. W. Wood, ‘ The 
Student,’ Sept. 1868, p. 81. 


480 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Pabt H. 

and the whole upper surface is often shaded and 
coloured in an admirable manner, as Mr. Wallace has 
remarked, for escaping detection. The front-wings of 
the Bombycidae and Noctuidae,^^ when at rest, generally 
overlap and conceal the hind-wings ; so that the latter 
might be brightly coloured without much risk; and 
they are in fact often thus coloured. During flight, 
moths would often be able to escape from their 
enemies ; nevertheless, as the hind -wings are then 
fully exposed to view, their bright colours must 
generally have been acquired at some little risk. But 
the following fact shews how cautious we ought to be 
in drawing conclusions on this head. The common 
Yellow Under-wings (Triphaena) often fly about during 
the day or early evening, and are then conspicuous 
from the colour of their hind-wings. It would 
naturally be thought that this would be a source of 
danger ; but Mr. J. Jenner Weir believes that it 
actually serves them as a means of escape, for birds 
strike at these brightly coloured and fragile surfaces, 
instead of at the body. For instance, Mr. Weir turned 
into his aviary a vigorous specimen of Triphasna 
pronuha, which was instantly pursued by a robin ; but 
the bird’s attention being caught by the coloured 
wings, the moth was not captured until after about 
fifty attempts, and small portions of the wings were 
repeatedly broken off. He tried the same experiment, 
in the open air, with a swallow and T. fimbria ; but 
the large size of this moth probably interfered with 
its capture.'* We are thus reminded of a statement 

Mr. Wallace in ‘ Hard- See also, on this subject, 

wicke’s Science Gossip,’ Sept. Mr. Weir’s paper in * Transact. 
1867, p. 193. Ent. Soc.’ 1869, p. 23. 


Chap. XT. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


481 


made by Mr. Wallace/® namely, that in the Brazilian 
forests and Malayan islands, many common and highly- 
decorated butterflies are weak flyers, though furnished 
with a broad expanse of wing ; and they “ are often 
“captured with pierced and broken wings, as if they 
“ had been seized by birds, from which they had 
“escaped: if the wings had been much smaller in 
“ proportion to the body, it seems probable that the 
“ insect would more frequently have been struck or 
“ pierced in a vital part, and thus the increased 
“expanse of the wings may have been indirectly 
“ beneficial.” 

Display . — The bright colours of many butterflies 
and of some moths are specially arranged for display, 
so that they may be readily seen. During the night 
colours are not visible, and there can be no doubt that 
the nocturnal moths, taken as a body, are much less 
gaily decorated than butterflies, all of which are 
diurnal in their habits. But the moths of certain 
families, such as the Zygaenidae, several Sphingidae, 
Uraniidae, some Arctiidae and Saturniidae, fly about 
during the day or early evening, and many of these 
are extremely beautiful, being far brighter coloured 
than the strictly nocturnal kinds. A few exceptional 
cases, however, of bright -coloured nocturnal species 
have been recorded.^* 

There is evidence of another kind in regard to 

Westminster Review,’ July relative colours of diurnal and 
1867, p, 16. nocturnal Lepidoptera, see ibid. 

**For instance, Lithosia ; but pp. 333 and 392; also Harris, 
Prof. Westwood (‘ Modern Class. ‘ Treatise on the Insects of New 
of Insects,’ vol. ii. p. 390) seems England,’ 1842, p. 315. 
surprised at this case. On the 

2 I 


482 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Part li 


display. Butterflies, as before remarked, elevate their 
wings when at rest, but whilst basking in the sunshine 
often alternately raise and depress them, thus exposing 
both surfaces to full view; and although the lower 
surface is often coloured in an obscure manner as a 
protection, yet in many species it is as highly decorated 
' as the upper surface, and sometimes in a very difierent 
manner. In some tropical species the lower surface is 
even more brilliantly coloured than the upper.^^ In 
the English fritillaries (Argynnis) the lower surface 
alone is ornamented with shining silver. Nevertheless, 
as a general rule, the upper surface, which is probably 
more fully exposed, is coloured more brightly and 
diversely than the lower. Hence the lower surface 
generally affords to entomologists the more useful 
character for detecting the affinities of the various 
species. Fritz Muller informs me that three species of 
Castnia are found near his house in S. Brazil : of two 
of them the hind-wings are obscure, and are always 
covered by the front -wings when these butterflies are 
at rest; but the third species has black hind- wings, 
beautifully spotted with red and white, and these are 
fully expanded and displayed whenever the butterfly 
rests. Other such cases could be added. 

If we now turn to the enormous group of moths, 
which, as I hear from Mr. Stainton, do not habitually 
expose the under surface of their wings to full view, 
we find this side very rarely coloured with a brightness 
greater than, or even equal to, that of the upper side. 

Such differences between ‘ Memoir on the Papilionidas of 
the upper and lower surfaces of the Malayan Region,’ in ‘ Trans- 
the wings of several species of act. Linn. Soc.’ vol. xxv. part i. 
Papilio may be seen in the 1865. 
beautiful plates to Mr. Wallace’s 


Chap. XT. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


483 


Some exceptions to the rule, either real or apparent, 
must be noticed, as the case of Hypopyra.^® Mr. 
Trimen informs me that in Guenee’s great work, three 
moths are figured, in which the under surface is much 
the more brilliant. For instance, in the Australian 
Gastrophora the upper surface of the fore- wing is pale 
greyish-ochreous, while the lower surface is magnifi- 
cently ornamented by an ocellus of cobalt-blue, placed 
in the midst of a black mark, surrounded by orange- 
yellow, and this by bluish-white. But the habits of 
these three moths are unknown ; so that no expla- 
nation can be given of their unusual style of colour- 
ing. Mr. Trimen also informs me that the lower 
surface of the wings in certain other Geometrae 
and quadrifid Noctuae are either more variegated or 
more brightly-coloured than the upper surface; but 
some of these species have the habit of “ holding their 
“ wings quite erect over their backs, retaining them 
“ in this position for a considerable time,” and thus 
exposing the under surface to view. Other species, 
when settled on the ground or herbage, now and then 
suddenly and slightly lift up their wings. Hence the 
lower surface of the wings being brighter than the 
upper surface in certain moths is not so anomalous as 
it at first appears. The Saturniida^ include some of 
the most beautiful of all moths, their wings being 
decorated, as in our British Emperor moth, with fine 
ocelli; and Mr. T. W. Wood^® observes that they 
resemble butterflies in some of their movements ; 

See Mr. Wormald on this (one of the Geometcae) in 

moth : ‘ Proc. Ent. Soc.’ March ‘ Transact. Ent. Soc.’ new series. 

2nd, 1868. vol. v. pi. xv. and xvi. 

See also an account of the ‘ Proc. Ent. Soc. of London,” 

S. American genus Erateina July 6, 1868, p. xxvii. 


484 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


“ for instance, in the gentle waving up and down of 
“ the wings as if for display, which is more charac- 
“ teristic of diurnal than of nocturnal Lepidoptera.” 

It is a singular fact that no British moths which are 
brilliantly coloured, and, as far as I can discover, 
hardly any foreign species, differ much in colour 
according to sex ; though this is the case with many 
brilliant butterflies. The male, however, of one 
American moth, the Saturnia lo, is described as 
having its fore-wings deep yellow, curiously marked 
with purplish-red spots ; whilst the wings of the 
female are purple-brown, marked with grey lines.^* 
The British moths which differ sexually in colour are 
all brown, or of various dull yellow tints, or nearly 
white. In several species the males are much darker 
than the females,^® and these belong to groups which 
generally fly about during the afternoon. On the 
other hand, in many genera, as Mr. Stainton informs 
me, the males have the hind- wings whiter than those 
of the female — of which fact Agrotis exclamationis 
offers a good instance. In the Ghost Moth (Eepialus 


Harris, ‘ Treatise,’ &c., edited 
by Flint, 1862, p. 395. 

^®For instance, I observe in 
my son’s cabinet tha^ the males 
are darker than the females in 
the Lasiocampa quercus, Odo~ 
nestis potatoria^ Eypogymna 
dispar^ Dasychira pudibunda^ 
and Cycnia mendica. In this 
latter species the difference in 
colour between the two sexes is 
strongly marked ; and Mr. 
Wallace informs me that we 
here have, as he believes, an 
instance of protective mimicry 
confined to one sex, as will 


hereafter be more fully ex- 
plained. I’he white female of 
the Cycnia resembles the very 
common Spilosoma menthrasti, 
both sexes of which are white ; 
and Mr. Stainton observed that 
this latter moth was rejected 
with utter disgust by a whole 
brood of young turkeys, which 
were fond of eating other moths ; 
so that if the Cycnia was com- 
monly mistaken by British birds 
for the Spilosoma, it would escape 
being devoured, and its white 
deceptive colour would thus be 
highly beneficial. 


Chap. XI. 


BUTTEKFLIES AND MOTHS. 


485 


humuli) the difference is more strongly marked; the 
males being white, and the females yellow with darker 
markings.^^ It is probable that in these cases the 
males are thus rendered more conspicuous, and more 
easily seen by the females whilst flying about in the 
dusk. 

From the several foregoing facts it is impossible to 
admit that the brilliant colours of butterflies, and of 
some few moths, have commonly been acquired for the 
sake of protection. We have seen that their colours 
and elegant patterns are arranged and exhibited as if 
for display. Hence I am led to believe that the 
females prefer or are most excited by the more brilliant 
males ; for on any other supposition the males would, 
as far as we can see, be ornamented to no purpose. 
We know that ants and certain Lamellicorn beetles are 
capable of feeling an attachment for each other, and 
that ants recognise their fellows after an interval of 
several months. Hence there is no abstract improba- 
bility in the Lepidoptera, which probably stand nearly 
or quite as high in the scale as these insects, having 
sufficient mental capacity to admire bright colours. 
They certainly discover flowers by colour. The 
Humming-bird Sphinx may often be seen to swoop 
down from a distance on a bunch of flowers in the 
midst of green foliage; and I have been assured by 
two persons abroad, that these moths repeatedly visit 

It is remarkable, that in the ture,’ April 1871, p. 489) that 
{Shetland Islands the male of this at the season of the year when 

moth, instead of differing widely the ghost-moth appears in these 
from the female, frequently re- northern islands, the whiteness 
sembles her closely in colour of the males would not be 

(see Mr. MacLachlao, ‘ Transact. needed to render them visible to 

Ent. Soc.’ vol. ii. 1866, p. 459). the females in the twilight night. 
Mr. G. Fraser stiggests (*Na- 


486 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


flowers painted on the walls of a room, and vainly 
endeavour to insert their proboscis into them. Fritz 
Muller informs me that several kinds of butterflies in 
S. Brazil shew an unmistakable preference for certain 
colours over others : he observed that they very often 
visited the brilliant red flowers of five or six genera of 
plants, hut never the white or yellow flowering species 
of the same and other genera, growing in the same 
garden ; and I have received other accounts to the 
same effect. As I hear from Mr. Doubleday, the 
common white butterfly often flies down to a bit of 
paper on the ground, no doubt mistaking it for one of 
its own species. Mr. Collingwood in speaking of the 
dijfficulty in collecting certain butterflies in the Malay 
Archipelago, states that “ a dead specimen pinned upon 

a conspicuous twig will often arfest an insect of the 
“ same species in its headlong flight, and bring it down 
“ within easy reach of the net, especially if it be of 
“ the opposite sex,” 

The courtship of butterflies is, as before remarked, a 
prolonged affair. The males sometimes tight together 
in rivalry ; and many may be seen pursuing or crowd- 
ing round the same female. Unless, then, the females 
prefer one male to another, the pairing must be left 
to mere chance, and this does not appear probable. 
If, on the other hand, the females habitually, or 
even occasionally, prefer the more beautiful males, the 
colours of the latter will have been rendered brighter 
by degrees, and will have been transmitted to both 
sexes or to one sex, according to the law of inheritance 
which has prevailed. The process of sexual selection 
will have been much facilitated, if the conclusion can 

“ ‘ Kaiiibles of a Naturalist in the Chinese Seas,’ 1868, p. 182. 


Chap. XL 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


487 


be trusted, arrived at from various kinds of evidence 
in the supplement to the ninth chapter ; namely, that 
the males of many Lepidoptera, at least in the imago 
state, greatly exceed the females in number. 

Some facts, however, are opposed to the belief that 
female butterflies prefer the more beautiful males ; 
thus, as I have been assured by several collectors, 
fresh females may frequently be seen paired with 
battered, faded, or dingy males ; but this is a circum- 
stance which could hardly fail often to follow from the 
males emerging from their cocoons earlier than the 
females. With moths of the family of the Bombycidm, 
the sexes pair immediately after assuming the imago 
state ; for they cannot feed, owing to the rudimentary 
condition of their mouths. The females, as several 
entomologists have remarked to me, lie in an almost 
torpid state, and appear not to evince the least choice 
in regard to their partners. This is the case with the 
common silk-moth (B, mori), as I have been told by 
some continental and English breeders. Dr. Wallace, 
who has had great experience in breeding Bomhyx 
cynthia, is convinced that the females evince no choice 
or preference. He has kept above 300 of these moths 
together, and has often found the most vigorous 
females mated with stunted males. The reverse 
appears to occur seldom ; for, as he believes, the 
more vigorous males pass over the weakly females, 
and are attracted by those endowed with most vita- 
lity. Nevertheless, the Bombycidse, though obscurely- 
coloured, are often beautiful to our eyes from their 
elegant and mottled shades. 

I have as yet only referred to the species in which 
the males are brighter coloured than the females, and 


488 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part U' 


I have attributed their beauty to the females for many 
generations having chosen and paired with the more 
attractive males. But converse cases occur, though 
rarely, in which the females are more brilliant than 
the males ; and here, as I believe, the males have 
selected the more beautiful females, and have thus 
slowly added to their beauty. We do not know why 
in various classes of animals the males of some few 
species have selected the more beautiful females in- 
stead of having gladly accepted any female, as seems 
to be the general rule in the animal kingdom ; but if, 
contrary to what generally occurs with the Lepi- 
doptera, the females were much more numerous than 
the males, the latter would be likely to pick out 
the more beautiful females. Mr. Butler shewed me 
several species of Callidryas in the British Museum, in 
some of which the females equalled, and in others 
greatly surpassed the males in beauty ; for the females 
alone have the borders of their wiugs suffused with 
crimson and orange, and spotted with black. The 
plainer males of these species closely resemble each 
other, shewing that here the females have been modi- 
fied ; whereas in those cases, where the males are the 
more ornate, it is these which have been modified, the 
females remaining closely alike. 

In England we have some analogous cases, though 
not so marked. The females alone of two species of 
Theda have a bright-purple or orange patch on their 
fore-wings. In Hipparchia the sexes do not differ 
much ; but it is the female of H, janira which has a 
conspicuous light-brown patch on her wings; and the 
females of some of the other species are brighter 
coloured than their males. Again, the females of 


Chap. XL 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


489 


Colias edusa and hyale have “ orange or yellow spots 
“ on the black marginal border, represented in the males 
“ only by thin streaks ; ” and in Pieris it is the females 
which “ are ornamented with black spots on the fore- 
“ wings, and these are only partially present in the 
“ males.” Now the males of many butterflies are 
known to support the females during their marriage 
flight ; but in the species just named it is the females 
which support the males ; so that the part which the 
two sexes play is reversed, as is their relative beauty. 
Throughout the animal kingdom the males commonly 
take the more active share in wooing, and their beauty 
seems to have been increased by the females having 
accepted the more attractive individuals ; hut with 
these butterflies, the females take the more active part 
in the final marriage ceremony, so that we may 
suppose that they likewise do so in the wooing ; and 
in this case we can understand how it is that they 
have been rendered the more beautiful. Mr. Meldola, 
from whom the foregoing statements have been taken, 
says in conclusion; “Though I am not convinced of 
“ the action of sexual selection in producing the colours 
“ of insects, it cannot be denied that these facts are 
“ strikingly corroborative of Mr. Darwin’s views.” 

As sexual selection primarily depends on variability, 
a few words must be added on this subject. In re- 
spect to colour there is no difficulty, for any number 
of highly variable Lepidoptera could be named. One 

‘ Nature,’ April 27th, 1871, ing. See also Mr. G. Fraser, in 
p. 508. Mr. Meldola quotes ‘Nature,’ April 20th, 1871, p. 
Donzel, in ‘ Soc. Ent. de 489, on the sexual differences ol 
France,’ 1837, p. 77, on the several British butterflies, 
flight of butterflies whilst pair- 


490 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


good instance will suffice. Mr. Bates shewed me a 
whole series of specimens of Papilio sesostris and P. 
childrense ; in the latter the males varied much in 
the extent of the beautifully enamelled green patch 
on the fore-wings, and in the size of the white 
mark, and of the splendid crimson stripe on the 
hind-wings; so that there was a great contrast 
amongst the males between the most and the least 
gaudy. The male of Papilio sesostris is much less 
beautiful than of P. childrense ; and it likewise varies 
a little in the size of the green patch on the fore- 
wings, and in the occasional appearance of the small 
crimson stripe on the hind-wings, borrowed, as it 
would seem, from its own female ; for the females of 
this and of many other species in the .®neas group 
possess this crimson stripe. Hence between the 
brightest specimens of P. sesostris and the dullest of 
P. childrense, there was but a small interval; and it 
was evident that as far as mere variability is con- 
cerned, there would be no difficulty in permanently 
increasing the beauty of either species by means of 
selection. The variability is here almost confined to 
the male sex ; but Mr. Wallace and Mr. Bates have 
shewn that the females of some species are extremely 
variable, the males being nearly constant. In a future 
chapter I shall have occasion to shew that the beau- 
tiful eye-like spots, or ocelli, found on the wings of 
many Lepidoptera, are eminently variable. I may 


^ Wallace on the Papilionidse 
of the Malayan Kegion, in 
‘ Transact. Linn. Soc.’ vol. xxv. 
1865, pp. 8, 36. A striking 
case of a rare variety, strictly 
intermediate between two other 


well-marked female varieties, is 
given by Mr. Wallace. See 
also Mr. Bates, in ‘ Proc. En- 
tomolog. Soc.’ Nov. 19th, 1866, 
p. xl. 


Chap. XI. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


491 


here add that these ocelli offer a difficulty on the 
theory of sexual selection ; for though appearing to us 
so ornamental, they are never present in one sex and 
absent in the other, nor do they ever differ much in 
the two sexes.^® This fact is at present inexplicable ; 
but if it should hereafter be found that the formation 
of an ocellus is due to some change in the tissues of 
the wings, for instance, occurring at a very early 
period of development, we might expect, from what 
we know of the laws of inheritance, that it would be 
transmitted to both sexes, though arising and per- 
fected in one sex alone. 

On the whole, although many serious objections may 
be urged, it seems probable that most of the brilliantly- 
coloured species of Lepidoptera owe their colours to 
sexual selection, excepting in certain cases, presently to 
be mentioned, in which conspicuous colours have been 
gained through mimicry as a protection. From the 
ardour of the male throughout the animal kingdom, he 
is generally willing to accept any female ; and it is the 
female which usually exerts a choice. Hence, if sexual 
selection has been efficient with the Lepidoptera, the 
male, when the sexes differ, ought to be the more 
brilliantly coloured, and this undoubtedly is the case. 
When both sexes are brilliantly coloured and resemble 
each other, the characters acquired by the males 
appear to have been transmitted to both. We are led 
to this conclusion by cases, even within the same 
genus, of gradation from an extraordinary amount of 
difference to identity in colour between the two sexes. 

^ Mr. Bates was so kind as have received answers to this 
to lay this subject before the effect from several entomo- 
Entomological Society, and I legists. 


492 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


But it may be asked whether the differences in 
colour between the sexes may not be accounted for by 
other means besides sexual selection. Thus the males 
and females of the same species of butterfly are in 
several cases known^® to inhabit different stations, the 
former commonly basking in the sunshine, the latter 
haunting gloomy forests. It is therefore possible that 
different conditions of life may have acted directly 
on the two sexes ; but this is not probable as in the 
adult state they are exposed to different conditions 
during a very short period ; and the larvae of both are 
exposed to the same conditions. Mr. Wallace believes 
that the difference between the sexes is due not so 
much to the males having been modified, as to the 
females having in all or almost all cases acquired dull 
colours for the sake of protection. It seems to me, on 
the contrary, far more probable that it is the males 
which have been chiefly modified through sexual selec- 
tion, the females having been comparatively little 
changed. We can thus understand how it is that the 
females of allied species generally resemble one another 
so much more closely than do the males. They thus 
shew us approximately the primordial colouring of the 
parent-species of the group to which they belong. 
They have, however, almost always been somewhat 
modified by the transfer to them of some of the 
successive variations, through the accumulation of 
which the males were rendered beautiful. But I do 
not wish to deny that the females alone of some species 


“ H. W. Bates, ‘The Natu- 
ralist on the Amazons,* vol. ii. 
1863, p. 228. A. R. Wallace, 
in ‘Transact. Linn. Soc.’ vol. 
XXV. 1865, p. 10. 


^ On this whole subject see 
‘ The Variation of Animals and 
Plants under Domestication,’ 
1868,' vol. ii. chap, xxiii. 


Chap, XI. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


493 


may have been specially modified for protection. In 
most cases the males and females of distinct species 
will have been exposed during their prolonged larval 
state to difierent conditions, and may have been thus 
affected ; though with the males any slight change of 
colour thus caused will generally have been masked by 
the brilliant tints gained through sexual selection. 
When we treat of Birds, I shall have to discuss the 
whole question, as to how far the differences in colour 
between the sexes are due to the males having been 
modified through sexual selection for ornamental pur- 
poses, or to the females having been modified through 
natural selection for the sake of protection, so that I 
will here say but little on the subject. 

In all the cases in which the more common form of 
equal inheritance by both sexes has prevailed, the 
selection of bright-coloured males would tend to make 
the females bright-coloured ; and the selection of dull- 
coloured females would tend to make the males dull. 
If both processes were carried on simultaneously, they 
would tend to counteract each other; and the final 
result would depend on whether a greater number of 
females from being well protected by obscure colours, 
or a greater number of males by being brightly-coloured 
and thus finding partners, succeeded in leaving more 
numerous offspring. 

In order to account for the frequent transmission of 
characters to one sex alone, Mr. Wallace expresses 
his belief that the more common form of equal in- 
heritance by both sexes can be changed through natural 
selection into inheritance by one sex alone, but in 
favour of this view I can discover no evidence. We 
know from what occurs under domestication that new 


494 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


characters often appear, which from the first are trans- 
mitted to one sex alone ; and by the selection of such 
variations there would not he the slightest difficulty in 
giving bright colours to the males alone, and at the 
same time or subsequently, dull colours to the females 
alone. In this manner the females of some butterfiies 
and moths have, it is probable, been rendered incon- 
spicuous for the sake of protection, and widely difierent 
from their males. 

I am, however, unwilling without distinct evidence 
to admit that two complex processes of selection, each 
requiring the transference of new characters to one 
sex alone, have been carried on with a multitude of 
species, — that the males have been rendered more 
brilliant by heating their rivals, and the females more 
dull-coloured by having escaped from their enemies. 
The male, for instance, of the common brimstone 
butterfly ( G-onepteryx), is of a far more intense yellow 
than the female, though she is equally conspicuous ; 
and it does not seem probable that she specially 
acquired her pale tints as a protection, though it is 
probable that the male acquired his bright colours 
as a sexual attraction. The female of Anihocharis car- 
damines does not possess the beautiful orange wing- 
tips of the male ; consequently she closely resembles 
the white butterflies (Pieris) so common in our 
gardens ; but we have no evidence that this resem- 
blance is beneficial to her. As, on the other hand, she 
resembles both sexes of several other species of the 
genus inhabiting various quarters of the world, it is 
probable that she has simply retained to a large extent 
her primordial colours. 

Finally, as we have seen, various considerations lead 


Chap. XI. BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 495 

to the conclusion that with the greater number of 
brilliantly-coloured Lepidoptera it is the male which 
has been chiefly modified through sexual selection ; the 
amount of difference between the sexes mostly depend- 
ing on the form of inheritance which has prevailed. 
Inheritance is governed by so many unknown laws or 
conditions, that it seems to us to act in a capricious 
manner and we can thus, to a certain extent, under- 
stand how it is that with closely allied species the 
sexes either differ to an astonishing degree, or are 
identical in colour. As all the successive steps in the 
process of variation are necessarily transmitted through 
the female, a greater or less number of such steps 
might readily become developed in her ; and thus we 
can understand the frequent gradations from an ex- 
treme difference to none at all between the sexes of 
allied species. These cases of gradation, it may be 
added, are much too common to favour the supposi- 
tion that we here see females actually undergoing the 
process of transition and losing their brightness for 
the sake of protection ; for we have every reason to 
conclude that at any one time the greater number of 
species are in a fixed condition. 

Mimicry . — This principle was first made clear in 
an admirable paper by Mr. Bates,^® who thus threw 
a flood of light on many obscure problems. It had 
previously been observed that certain butterflies in S. 
America belonging to quite distinct families, resembled 
the Heliconidae so closely in every stripe and shade 
of colour, that they could not be distinguished save by 

“ * The Variation of Animals ^ ‘ Transact. Linn. Soc.’ vol. 
and Plants under Domestica- xxiii. 1862, p. 495, 
tion,’ vol. ii. chap. xii. p. 17. 


496 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


an experienced entomologist. As the Heliconidae are 
coloured in their usual manner, whilst the others 
depart from the usual colouring of the groups to which 
they belong, it is clear that the latter are the imitators, 
and the Heliconidae the imitated. Mr. Bates further 
observed that the imitating species are comparatively 
rare, whilst the imitated abound, and that the two sets 
live mingled together. From the fact of the Heli- 
conidse being conspicuous and beautiful insects, yet so 
numerous in individuals and species, he concluded that 
they must he protected from the attacks of enemies 
by some secretion or odour ; and this conclusion has 
now been amply confirmed,®® especially by Mr. Belt. 
Hence Mr. Bates inferred that the butterflies which 
imitate the protected species have acquired their 
present marvellously deceptive appearance through 
variation and natural selection, in order to be mistaken 
for the protected kinds, and thus to escape being 
devoured. No explanation is here attempted of the 
brilliant colours of the imitated, hut only of the imitat- 
ing butterflies. We must account for the colours of the 
former in the same general manner, as in the cases 
previously discussed in this chapter. Since the publica- 
tion of Mr. Bates’ paper, similar and equally striking 
facts have been observed by Mr. Wallace in the Malayan 
region, by Mr. Trimen in South Africa, and by Mr. 
Eiley in the United States.®' 

^ ‘ Proc. Ent. Soc.’ Dec. 3rd, ‘ Third Annual Report on the 
1866, p. xlv. Noxious Insects of Missouri, 

Wallace, ‘Transact. Lino. 1871, pp. Ki3-168. This latter 
Soc.’ vol. XXV. 1865, p. 1 ; also essay is valuable, as Mr. Riley 
‘ Transact. Ent. Soc.’ vol. iv. here discusses all the objections 
(3rd series), 1867, p. 301. which have been raised against 
Trimen, ‘ Linn. Transact.’ vol. Mr. Bates’ theory, 
xxvi. 1869, p. 497. Riley, 


Chap. XI. BUTTEKFLIES AND MOTHS. 497 

As some writers have felt much difficulty in under- 
standing how the first steps in the process of mimicry 
could have been effected through natural selection, it 
may be well to remark that the process probably com- 
menced long ago between forms not widely dissimilar 
in colour. In this case even a slight variation would 
be beneficial, if it rendered the one species more like 
the other; and afterwards the imitated species might 
be modified to an extreme degree through sexual selec- 
tion or other means, and if the changes were gradual, 
the imitators might easily be led along the same track, 
until they differed to an equally extreme degree from 
their original condition ; and they would thus ulti- 
mately assume an appearance or colouring wholly 
unlike that of the other members of the group to which 
they belonged. It should also be remembered that 
many species of Lepidoptera are liable to considerable 
and abrupt variations in colour. A few instances have 
been given in this chapter ; and many more may be 
found in the papers of Mr. Bates and Mr. Wallace. 

With several species the sexes are alike, and imitate 
the two sexes of another species. But Mr. Trimen gives, 
in the paper already referred to, three cases in which 
the sexes of the imitated form differ from each other 
in colour, and the sexes of the imitating form differ in 
a like manner. Several cases have also been recorded 
where the females alone imitate brilliantly-coloured 
and protected species, the males retaining “ the normal 
“ aspect of their immediate congeners.” It is here 
obvious that the successive variations by which the 
female has been modified have been transmitted to her 
alone. It is, however, probable that some of the many 
successive variations would have been transmitted to, 

2 K 


m 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


and developed in, the males had not such males been 
eliminated by being thus rendered less attractive to 
the females ; so that only those variations were pre- 
served which were from the first strictly limited in 
their transmission to the female sex. We have a partial 
illustration of these remarks in a statement by Mr* 
Belt;^^ that the males of some of the Leptalicles, which 
imitate protected species, still retain in a concealed 
manner some of their original characters. Thus in 
the males “ the upper half of the lower wing is of a 
“ pure white, whilst all the rest of the wings is barred 
“ and spotted with black, red and yellow, like the 
“ species they mimic. The females have not this white 
“ patch, and the males usually conceal it by covering 
“ it with the upper wing, so that I cannot imagine its 
“ being of any other use to them than as an attraction 
“ in courtship, when they exhibit it to the females, and 
“ thus gratify their deep-seated preference for the 
“ normal colour of the Order to which the Leptalides 
“ belong.” 

Bright Colours of Caterpillars . — Whilst reflecting on 
the beauty of many butterflies, it occurred to me that 
some caterpillars were splendidly coloured; and as 
sexual selection could not possibly have here acted, it 
appeared rash to attribute the beauty of the mature 
insect to this agency, unless the bright colours of their 
larvae could be somehow explained. In the first place, 
it may be observed that the colours of caterpillars do 
not stand in any close correlation with those of the 
mature insect. Secondly, their bright colours do not 
serve in any ordinary manner as a protection. Mr. 

“ ‘The Naturalist in Nicaragua,’ 1874, p. 385. 


Chap. XI. 


BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS. 


499 


Bates informs me, as an instance of this, that the most 
conspicuous caterpillar which he ever beheld (that of a 
Sphinx) lived on the large green leaves of a tree on 
the open llanos of South America; it was about four 
inches in length, transversely banded with black and 
yellow, and with its head, legs, and tail of a bright red. 
Hence it caught the eye of any one who passed by, 
even at the distance of many yards, and no doubt that 
of every passing bird. 

I then applied to Mr. Wallace, who has an innate 
genius for solving difficulties. After some considera- 
tion he replied : “ Most caterpillars require protection, 
“ as may be inferred from some kinds being furnished 
“ with spines or irritating hairs, and from many being 
“ coloured green like the leaves on which they feed, or 
“ being curiously like the twigs of the trees on which 
“ they live.” Another instance of protection, fur- 
nished me by Mr. J. Mansel Weale, may be added, 
namely, that there is a caterpillar of a moth which 
lives on the mimosas in South Africa, and fabricates for 
itself a case quite indistinguishable from the surround- 
ing thorns. From such considerations Mr. Wallace 
thought it probable that conspicuously coloured cater- 
pillars were protected by having a nauseous taste ; but 
as their skin is extremely tender, and as their intes- 
tines readily protrude from a wound, a slight peck from 
the beak of a bird would be as fatal to them as if they 
had been devoured. Hence, as Mr. Wallace remarks, 
“ distastefulness alone would be insufficient to protect 
“a caterpillar unless some outward sign indicated to 
“ its would-be destroyer that its prey was a disgusting 
“ morsel,” Under these circumstances it would be 
highly advantageous to a caterpillar to be instanta- 


500 


^ THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


neoiisly and certainly recognised as unpalatable by 
all birds and other animals. Thus the most gaudy 
colours would be serviceable, and might have been 
gained by variation and the survival of the most easily- 
recognised individuals. 

This hypothesis appears at first sight very bold, but 
when it was brought before the Entomological Society 
it was supported by various statements; and Mr. J. 
Jenner Weir, who keeps a large number of birds in an 
aviary, informs me that he has made many trials, and 
finds no exception to the rule, that all caterpillars of 
nocturnal and retiring habits with smooth skins, all 
of a green colour, and all which imitate twigs, are 
greedily devoured by his birds. The hairy and spinose 
kinds are invariably rejected, as were four ‘ conspicu- 
ously-coloured species. When the birds rejected a 
caterpillar, they plainly shewed, by shaking their 
heads, and cleansing their beaks, that they were 
disgusted by the taste.^^ Three conspicuous kinds of 
caterpillars and moths were also given to some lizards 
and frogs, by Mr. A. Butler, and were rejected, though 
other kinds were eagerly eaten. Thus the probability 
of Mr. Wallace’s view is confirmed, namely, that 
certain caterpillars have been made conspicuous for 
their own good, so as to be easily recognised by their 
enemies, on nearly the same principle that poisons are 
sold in coloured bottles by druggists for the good of 

^ ‘ Proc. Entomolog. Soc.’ Riley has given analogous facts 
Dec. 3rd, 1866, p. xlv., and in the ‘ Third Annual Report on 
March 4th, 1867, p. Ixxx. the Noxious Insects of Mis- 

^ See Mr. J. Jenner Weir’s souri,’ 1871, p. 148. Some 
paper on Insects and Insecti- opposed cases are, however, 
vorous Birds, in ‘ Transact Ent. given by Dr. Wallace and M. 
Soc.’ 1869, p. 21; also Mr. H. d’Orville; see ‘Zoological 
Butler’s paper, ibid. p. 27. Mr. Record,’ 1869, p. 349. 


Ghap. XL 


SUMMARY ON INSECTS. 


501 


man. We cannot, however, at present thus explain 
the elegant diversity in the colours of many cater- 
pillars ; but any species which had at some former 
period acquired a dull, mottled, or striped appearance, 
either in imitation of surrounding objects, or from the 
direct action of climate, &c., almost certainly would 
not become uniform in colour, when its tints were 
rendered intense and bright; for in order to make* a 
caterpillar merely conspicuous, there would be no 
selection in any definite direction. 

Summary and Concluding Remarks on Insects . — 
Looking back to the several Orders, we see that the 
sexes often dififer in various characters, the meaning of 
which is not in the least understood. The sexes, also, 
often differ in their organs of sense and means of 
locomotion, so that the males rnay quickly discover 
and reach the females. They differ still oftener in 
the males possessing diversified contrivances for retain- 
ing the females when found. We are, however, here 
concerned only in a secondary degree with sexual 
differences of these kind. 

In almost all the Orders, the males of some species, 
even of weak and delicate kinds, are known to be 
highly pugnacious ; and some few are furnished with 
special weapons for fighting with their rivals. But 
the law of battle does not prevail nearly so widely with 
insects as with the higher animals. Hence it probably 
arises, that it is in only a few cases that the males 
have been rendered larger and stronger than the 
females. On the contrary, they are usually smaller, so 
that they may be developed within a shorter time, to be 
ready in large numbers for the emergence of the females. 

In two families of the Homoptera and in three of the 


502 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


Orthoptera, the males alone possess sound-producing 
organs in an efficient state. These are used incessantly 
during the breeding-season, not only for calling the 
females, but apparently for charming or exciting them 
in rivalry with other males. No one who admits the 
agency of selection of any kind, will, after reading the 
above discussion, dispute that these musical instruments 
have been acquired through sexual selection. In four 
other Orders the members of one sex, or more com- 
monly of both sexes, are provided with organs for pro- 
ducing various sounds, which apparently serve merely as 
call-notes. When both sexes are thus provided, the 
individuals which were able to make the loudest or 
most continuous noise would gain partners before those 
which were less noisy, so that their organs have 
probably been gaitied through sexual selection. It is 
instructive to reflect on the wonderful diversity of the 
means for producing sound, possessed by the males 
alone, or by both sexes, in no less than six Orders. 
We thus learn how effectual sexual selection has been 
in leading to modifications which sometimes, as with the 
Homoptera, relate to important parts of the organisation. 

From the reasons assigned in the last chapter, it is 
probable that the great horns possessed by the males of 
many Lamellicorn, and some other beetles, have been 
acquired as ornaments. From the small size of insects, 
we are apt to undervalue their appearance. If we 
could imagine a male Chalcosoma (fig. 16), with its 
polished bronzed coat of mail, and its vast complex 
horns, magnified to the size of a horse, or even of a 
dog, it would be one of the most imposing animals in 
the world. 

The colouring of insects is a complex and obscure 
subject. When the male differs slightly from the 


Chap. XL SUMMARY ON INSECTS. 503 

female, and neither are brilliantly-coloured, it is 
probable that the sexes have varied in a slightly 
different manner, and that the variations have been 
transmitted by each sex to the same, without any 
benefit or evil thus accruing. When the male is 
brilliantly-coloured and differs conspicuously from the 
female, as with some dragon-flies and many butterflies, 
it is probable that he owes his colours to sexual 
selection ; whilst the female has retained a primordial 
or very ancient type of colouring, slightly modified by 
the agencies before explained. But in some cases the 
female has apparently been made obscure by variations 
transmitted to her alone, as a means of direct protec- 
tion; and it is almost certain that she has sometimes 
been made brilliant, so as to imitate other protected 
species inhabiting the same district. When the sexes 
resemble each other and both are obscurely coloured 
there is no doubt that they have been in a multitude of 
cases so coloured for the sake of protection. So it is in 
some instances when both are brightly-coloured, for they 
thus imitate protected species, or resemble surrounding 
objects such as flowers; or they give notice to their 
enemies that they are unpalatable. In other cases in 
which the sexes resemble each other and are both 
brilliant, especially when the colours are arranged for 
display, w^e may conclude that they have been gained 
by the male sex as an attraction, and have been trans- 
ferred to the female. We are more especially led to 
this conclusion whenever the same type of coloration 
prevails throughout a whole group, and we And that 
the males of some species differ widely in colour from 
the females, whilst others differ slightly or not at all 
with intermediate gradations connecting these extreme 
states. 


504 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


In the same manner as bright colours have often 
Ijeen partially transferred from the males to the 
females, so it has been with the extraordinary horns of 
many Lamellicorn and some other beetles. So again, 
the sound-producing organs proper to the males of the 
^ Homoptera and Orthoptera have generally been trans- 
ferred in a rudimentary, or even in a nearly perfect 
condition, to the females; yet not sufficiently perfect 
to be of any use. It is also an interesting fact, as 
bearing on sexual selection, that the stridulating organs 
of certain male Orthoptera are not fully developed 
until the last moult ; and that the colours of certain 
male dragon-flies are not fully developed until some 
little time after their emergence from the pupal state, 
and wlien they are ready to breed. 

Sexual selection implies that the more attractive 
individuals are preferred by the opposite sex ; and as 
with insects, when the sexes differ, it is the male 
which, with some rare exceptions, is the more 
ornamented, and departs more from the type to which 
the species belongs ; — and as it is the male which 
searches eagerly for the female, we must suppose that 
the females habitually or occasionally prefer the more 
beautiful males, and that these have thus acquired 
their beauty. That the females in most or all the 
Orders would have the power of rejecting any particular 
male, is probable from the many singular contrivances 
possessed by the males, such as great jaws, adhesive 
cushions, spines, elongated legs, &c., for seizing the 
female ; for these contrivances show that there is some 
difficulty in the act, so that her concurrence would 
seem necessary. Judging from what we know of the 
perceptive powers and affections of various insects, 
there is no antecedent improbability in sexual selection 


Chap. XT. 


SUMMARY ON INSECTS. 


505 


liaviug come largely into play ; but we have as yet no 
direct evidence on this head, and some facts are 
opposed to the belief. Nevertheless, when we see 
many males pursuing the same female, we can hardly 
believe that the pairing is left to blind chance — that 
the female exerts no choice, and is not influenced by 
the gorgeous colours or other ornaments with which 
the male is decorated. 

If we admit that the females of the Homoptera and 
Orthoptera appreciate the musical tones of their male 
partners, and that the various instruments have been 
perfected through sexual selection, there is little 
improbability in the females of other insects appreci- 
ating beauty in form or colour, and consequently 
in such characters having been thus gained by the 
males. But from the circumstance of colour being so 
variable, and from its having been so often modified 
for the sake of protection, it is difficult to decide in 
how large a proportion of cases sexual selection has 
played a part. This is more especially difficult in 
those Orders, such as Orthoptera, Hymenoptera, and 
Coleoptera, in which the two sexes rarely differ much 
in colour ; for we are then left to mere analogy. With 
the Coleoptera, however, as before remarked, it is in 
the great Lamellicorn group, placed by some authors 
at the head of the Order, and in which we sometimes 
see a mutual attachment between the sexes, that we 
find the males of some species possessing weapons for 
sexual strife, others furnished with wonderful horns, 
many with stridulating organs, and others ornamented 
with splendid metallic tints. Hence it seems probable 
that all these characters have been gained through the 
same means, namely sexual selection. With butterflies 
we have the best evidence, as the males sometimes 


506 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


take pains to display their beautiful colours ; and we 
cannot believe that they would act thus, unless the 
display was of use to them in their courtship. 

When we treat of Birds, we shall see that they 
present in their secondary sexual characters the 
closest analogy with insects. Thus, many male birds 
are highly pugnacious, and some are furnished with 
special weapons for fighting with their rivals. They 
possess organs which are used during the breeding- 
season for producing vocal and instrumental music. 
They are frequently ornamented with combs, horns, 
wattles and plumes of the most diversified kinds, and 
are decorated with beautiful colours, all evidently for 
the sake of display. We shall find that, as with 
insects, both sexes in certain groups are equally 
beautiful, and are equally provided with ornaments 
which are usually confined to the male sex. In other 
groups both sexes are equally plain-coloured and 
unornamented. Lastly, in some few anomalous cases, 
the females are more beautiful than the males. We 
shall often find, in the same group of birds, every 
gradation from no difference between the sexes, to an 
extreme difference. We shall see that female birds, 
like female insects, often possess more or less plain 
traces or rudiments of characters which properly 
belong to the males and are of use only to them. 
The analogy, indeed, in all these respects between 
birds and insects is curiously close. Whatever ex- 
planation applies to the one class probably applies 
to the other; and this explanation, as we shall 
hereafter attempt to shew in further detail, is sexual 
selection. 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


507 


CHAPTEE XTT. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Fishes, 
Amphibians, and Eeptiles. 


Fishes : Courtship and battles of the males — Larger size of the 
females — Males, bright colours and ornamental appendages ; 
other strange characters — Colours and appendages acquired by 
the males during the breeding-season alone — Fishes with both 
sexes brilliantly coloured — Protective colours — The less con- 
spicuous coloui-s of the female cannot be accounted for on the 
principle of protection — Male fishes building nests, and taking 
charge of the ova and young. Amphibians : Difierences in 
structure and colour between the sexes — Vocal organs. Reptiles : 
Chelonians — Crocodiles — Snakes, colours in some cases pro- 
tective — Lizards, battles of — Ornamental appendages — Strange 
differences in structure between the sexes — Colours — Sexual 
differences almost as great as with birds. 

We have have now arrived at the great sub-kingdom 
of the Vertebrata, and will commence with the lowest 
class, that of Fishes. The males of Plagiostomous 
fishes (sharks, rays) and of Chimaeroid fishes are 
provided with claspers which serve to retain the 
female, like the various structures possessed by 
many of the lower animals. Besides the claspers, 
the males of many rays have clusters of strong sharp 
spines on their heads, and several rows along “the 


508 


. THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


“ upper outer surface of their pectoral fins.” These 
are present in the males of some species, which have 
other parts of their bodies smooth. They are only 
temporarily developed during the breeding-season ; 
and Dr. Gunther suspects that they are brought into 
action as prehensile organs by the doubling inwards 
and downwards of the two sides of the body. It 
is a remarkable fact that the females and not the 
males of some species, as of Baia clavata, have their 
backs studded with large hook-formed spines.^ 

The males alone of the capelin {Mallotus villosus, 
one of Salmonidae), are provided with a ridge of 
closely-set, brush-like scales, by the aid of which 
two males, one on each side, hold the female, whilst 
she runs with great swiftness on the sandy beach, 
and there deposits her spawn.^ The widely distinct 
Monacanthus scopas presents a somewhat analogous 
structure. The male, as Dr. Gunther informs me, 
has a cluster of stiff, straight spines, like those of a 
comb, on the sides of the tail ; and these in a specimen 
six inches long were nearly one and a half inches 
in length ; the female has in the same place a cluster 
of bristles, which may be compared with those of 
a tooth-brush. In another species, M. peronii, tlie 
male has a brush like that possessed by the female 
of the last species, whilst the sides of the tail in 
the female are smooth. In some other species of the 
same genus the tail can be perceived to be a little 
. roughened in the male and perfectly smooth in the 

^ Yarrell’s ‘ Hist, of British are peculiar to the female. 

Fishes,’ vol. ii. 1836, pp. 417, ^ ‘The American Naturalist,’ 

425, 436. Dr. Gunther informs April 1871, p. 119. 
me that the spines in R. clavata 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


509 


female ; and lastly in others, both sexes have smooth 
sides. 

The males of many fish fight for the possession of 
tlie females. Thus the male stickleback {Gasterosteus 
leiurus) has been described as “ mad with delight,” 
when the female comes out of her hiding-place and 
surveys the nest which he has made for her. “He 
“ darts round her in every direction, then to his 
“accumulated materials for the nest, then back again 
“ in an instant ; and as she does not advance he 
“ endeavours to push her with his snout, and then 
“tries to pull her by the tail and side-spine to the 
“ nest.” ^ The males are said to be polygamists ; ^ they 
are extraordinarily bold and pugnacious, whilst “the 
“ females are quite pacific.” Their battles are at times 
desperate ; “ for these puny combatants fasten tight 
“ on each other for several seconds, tumbling over and 
“over again, until their strength appears completely 
“exhausted.” With the rough-tailed stickleback {G. 
trachurus) the males whilst fighting swim round and 
round each other, biting and endeavouring to pierce 
each other with their raised lateral spines. The same 
writer adds,® “ the bite of these little furies is very 
“ severe. They also use their lateral spines with such 
“fatal effect, that I have seen one during a battle 
“absolutely rip his opponent quite open, so that he 
“ sank to the bottom and died.” When a fish is 
conquered, “ his gallant bearing forsakes him ; his gay 
“ colours fade away ; and he hides his disgrace among 

3 See Mr. R. Waringtoii’s in- ^ Noel Humphreys, ‘ River 
te resting articles in ‘Annals and Gardens,’ 1857. 

Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ Oct. 1852 ® Loudon’s ‘ Mag. of Nat. 

and Nov. 1855. History,’ vol. hi. 1830, p. 331. 


510 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Part II 


“his peaceable companions, but is for some time the 
“ constant object of his conqueror’s persecution.” 

The male salmon is as pugnacious as the little 
stickleback ; and so is the male trout, as I hear from 
Dr. Gunther. Mr. Shaw saw a violent contest between 
two male salmon which lasted the whole day ; and Mr. 
R Buist, Superintendent of Fisheries, informs me that 
he has often watched from the bridge at Perth the 
males driving away their rivals, whilst the females 
were spawning. The males “are constantly fighting 
“and tearing each other on the spawning-beds, and 
“many so injure each other as to cause the death of 
“ numbers, many being seen swimming near the banks 
“ of the river in a state of exhaustion, and apparently 
“in a dying state.”® Mr. Buist informs me, that in 
June 1868, the keeper of the Stormontfield breeding- 
ponds visited the northern Tyne and found about 800 
dead salmon, all of which with one exception were 
males ; and he was convinced that they had lost their 
lives by fighting. 

The most curious point about the male salmon is 
that during the breeding - season, besides a slight 
change in colour, “the lower jaw elongates, and a 
“cartilaginous projection turns upwards from the 
“point, which, when the jaws are closed, occupies a 
“ deep cavity between the intermaxillary bones of the 
upper jaw.” ^ (Figs. 27 and 28.) In our salmon this 
change of structure lasts only during the breeding- 

® ‘The Field,’ June 29th, like the stag, the male would, if 
1867. For Mr. Shaw’s State- he could, keep all other males 
ment, see ‘Edinburgh Review,’ away. 

1843. Another experienced ob- ’ Yarrell, ‘History of British 
server (Scrope’s ‘Days of Salmon Fishes,’ vol. ii. 1836, p. 10. 
Fishing,’ p. 60) remarks that 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


511 


season ; but in the Salmo lycaodon of N.-W. America 
the change, as Mr. J. K. Lord® believes, is permanent, 



Fig. 27. Head of male common salmon {Salmo salar) during the breeding-season. 

[This drawing, as well as all the others in the present chapter, have been executed 
by the well-known artist, Mr. G. Ford, from specimens in the British Museum, under 
the kind superintendence of Dr. Giinther.] 

and best marked in the older males which have 
previously ascended the rivers. In these old males 
the jaw becomes developed into an immense hook-like 

® ‘The Xaturalist in Vancouver’s Island,’ vol. i. 1866, p. 64. 


512 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


projection, and the teeth grow into regular fangs 
often more than half an inch in length. With the 
European salmon, according to Mr. Lloyd, ^ the 



temporary hook-like structure serves to strengthen 
and protect the jaws, when one male charges another 
with w^onderful violence ; but the greatly developed 

^ ‘Scandinavian Adventures,’ vol. i. 1854, pp, 100, 104. 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


513 


teeth of the male American salmon may be compared 
with the tusks of many male mammals, and they 
indicate an offensive rather than a protective purpose. 

The salmon is not the only fish in which the teeth 
differ in the two sexes ; as this is the case with many 
rays. In the thornback {Raia clavata) the adult male 
has sharp, pointed teeth, directed backwards, whilst 
those of the female are broad and flat, and form a 
pavement ; so that these teeth differ in the two sexes 
of the same species more than is usual in distinct 
genera of the same family. The teeth of the male 
become sharp only when he is adult : whilst young 
they are broad and flat like those of the female. As 
so frequently occurs with secondary sexual characters, 
both sexes of some species of rays (for instance E. 
batis), when adult, possess sharp pointed teeth; and 
here a character, proper to and primarily gained by 
the male, appears to have been transmitted to the 
offspring of both sexes. The teeth are likewise pointed 
in both sexes of E. maculata^ but only when quite 
adult ; the males acquiring them at an earlier age 
than the females. We shall hereafter meet with 
analogous cases in certain birds, in which the male 
acquires the plumage common to both sexes when 
adult, at a somewhat earlier age than does the female. 
With other species of rays the males even when old 
never possess sharp teeth, and consequently the adults 
of both sexes are provided with broad, flat teeth like 
those of the young, and like those of the mature 
females of the above - mentioned species.^^ As the 

See Yan-ell’s account of the with an excellent figure, and 
rays in his ‘ Hist, of British pp. 422, 432. 
pishes,’ vol. ii. 1836, p. 416, 


514 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


rays are bold, strong and voracious fisli, we may 
suspect that the males require their sharp teeth for 
fighting with their rivals ; but as they possess many 
parts modified and adapted for the prehension of the 
female, it is possible that their teeth may be used 
for this purpose. 

In regard to size, M. Carbonnier^^ maintains that 
the female of almost all fishes is larger than the male ; 
and Dr. Gunther does not know of a single instance in 
which the male is actually larger than the female. 
With some Cyprinodonts the male is not even half 
as large. As in many kinds of fishes the males 
habitually fight together, it is surprising that they 
have not generally become larger and stronger than 
the females through the effects of sexual selection. 
The males suffer from their small size, for according 
to M. Carbonnier, they are liable to be devoured 
by the females of their own species when carni- 
vorous, and no doubt by other species. Increased 
size must be in some manner of more importance 
to the females, than strength and size are to the 
males for fighting with other males ; and this per- 
haps is to allow of the production of a vast number 
of ova. 

In many species the male alone is ornamented with 
bright colours ; or these are much brighter in the 
male than the female. The male, also, is sometimes 
provided with appendages which appear to be of no 
more use to him for the ordinary purposes of life, than 
are the tail feathers to the peacock. I am indebted for 
most of the following facts to the kindness of Dr. 


As quoted in ‘The Farmer,’ 1868, p. 369, 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


515 


Giiiitlier. There is reason to snspect tliat many 
tropical fishes differ sexually in colour and structure ; 
and there are some striking cases with our British 
fishes. The male Gallionymus hjra has been called the 
gemmeous dragonet “ from its brilliant gem-like colours.” 
When fresh caught from the sea the body is yellow of 
various shades, striped and spotted with vivid blue on 
the head ; the dorsal fins are pale brown with dark 
longitudinal bands ; the ventral, caudal, and anal fins 
being bluish-black. The female, or sordid dragonet, 
was considered by Linnaeus, and by many subsequent 
naturalists, as a distinct species ; it is of a dingy 
reddish-brown, with the dorsal fin brown and the other 
fins white. The sexes dijffer also in the proportional 
size of the head and mouth, and in the position of the 
eyes hut the most striking difference is the extra- 
ordinary elongation in the male (fig. 29) of the dorsal 
fin. Mr. W. Saville Kent remarks that this “ singular 
“ appendage appears from my observations of the 

species in confinement, to he subservient to the same 
“ end as the wattles, crests, and other abnormal adjuncts 
“ of the male in gallinaceous birds, for the purpose of 
“ fascinating their mates.” The young males re- 
semble the adult females in structure and colour. 
Throughout the genus Gallionymus,^^ the male is gener- 
ally much more brightly spotted than the female, and 
in several species, not only the dorsal, hut the anal fin 
is much elongated in the males. 

The male of the Coitus scorj^ius^ or sea-scorpion, is 
slenderer and smaller than the female. There is also 

“I have drawn up this descrip- ‘Catalogue of Acanth. 

tion from YarrellVBritish Fishes,’ Fishes in the British Museum, 
vol. i. I83d, pp. 261 and 266. by Dr. Gtiiitlier, 1861, pp. 13 h- 

^ ‘ Nature,’ July 1873 p., 264. 151. 


516 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


a great difference in colour between them. It is diffi- 
cult, as Mr. Lloyd remarks, “ for any one, who has 
“ not seen this fish during the spawning-season, when 
“ its hues are brightest, to conceive the admixture of 
“brilliant colours with which it, in other respects so 
“ ill-favoured, is at that time adorned.” Both sexes of 




Fig. 29. Callionymus lyra. Upper figure, male ; lower figure, female. 

N.B. The lower figure ie more reduced than the upper. 

the Labrus mixtus, although very different in colour, 
are beautiful ; the male being orange with bright blue 
stripes, and the female bright red with some black 
spots on the back. 

In the very distinct family of the Cyprinodontidas — 
inhabitants of the fresh waters of foreign lands — the 


^ ‘ Game Birds of Sweden,’ &c., 1867, p. 466, 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


517 


sexes sometimes differ much in various characters. In 
the male of the Mollienesia petenensis,^^ the dorsal fin is 
greatly developed and* is marked with a row of large, 
round, ocellated, bright-coloured spots ; whilst the 
same fin in the female is smaller, of a different shape, 
and marked only with irregularly curved brown spots. 
In the male the basal margin of the anal fin is also a 
little produced and dark coloured. In the male of an 
allied form, the XiphopJiorus Hellerii (fig. 30), the in- 




Flg. 30. Xiphophorus Hellerii. Upper figure, male ; lower figure, female, 


ferior margin of the caudal fin is developed into a long 
filament, which, as I hear from Dr. Gunther, is striped 
with bright colours. This filament does not contain 
any muscles, and apparently cannot be of any direct 
use to the fish. As in the case of the Callionymus, the 

With respect to this and on the ‘ Fishes of Central 
the following species I am in- America,’ in ‘Transact. Zoolog. 
deb ted to Dr. Gunther for Soc.’ vol. vi. 1868, p. 485. 
information : see also his paper 


518 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


males whilst young resemble the adult females in colour 
and structure. Sexual dijfferences such as these may 
be strictly compared with those which are so frequent 
with gallinaceous hirds.^’ 

In a siluroid fish, inhabiting the fresh waters of South 
America, i]iQ Plecostomus harbatus^^ (fig. 31), the male 
has its mouth and inter-operculum fringed with a heard 
of stiff hairs, of which the female shows hardly a trace. 
These hairs are of the nature of scales In another 
species of the same genus, soft flexible tentacles project 
from the front part of the head of the male, which are 
absent in the female. These tentacles are prolongations 
of the true skin, and therefore are not homologous with 
the stiff hairs of the former species ; hut it can hardly 
be doubted that both serve the same purpose. What 
this purpose may he, it is diflicult to conjecture ; orna- 
ment does not here seem probable, but we can hardly 
suppose that stiff hairs and flexible filaments can be 
useful in any ordinary way to the males alone. In that 
strange monster, the Ghimsera monstrosa^ the male has 
a hook-shaped bone on the top of the head, directed 
forwards, with its end rounded and covered with sharp 
spines ; in the female “ this crown is altogether absent,’’ 
but what its use may be to the male is utterly unknown.^^ 

The structures as yet referred to are permanent in 
the male after he has arrived at maturity; but with 
some Blennies, and in another allied genus, a crest is 

Dr. Giinther makes this Water,’ July 1868, p. 377, with 
remark ; ‘ Catalogue of Fishes a figure. Many other cases could 
in the British Museum,’ vol. iii. he added of structures peculiar 
1861, p. 141. to the male, of which the uses 

See Dr. Giintlier on this are not known, 
genus, in ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ Dr. Gunther, ‘Catalogue 

1868, p. 232. of Fishes,’ vol. iii. pp. 221 and 

F. Buckland, in ‘ Land and 240. 


Chak XIL 


FISHES. 


519 



Fig. 1. riecostooius barbatue. 


Upper figiue, head of male; lower figure, female. 


520 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Taut II. 


developed on the head of the male only during the 
breeding season, and the body at the same time becomes 
more brightly-coloured. There can be little doubt that 
this crest serves as a temporary sexual ornament, for 
the female does not exhibit a trace of it. In other 
^ species of the same genus both sexes possess a crest, 
and in at least one species neither sex is thus provided. 
In many of the Chromidse, for instance in Geophagus 
and especially in Cichla, the males, as I hear from Pro- 
fessor Agassiz,^^ have a conspicuous protuberance on 
the forehead, which is wholly wanting in the females 
and in the young males. Professor Agassiz adds, “ I 
“ have often observed these fishes at the time of spawn- 
“ing when the protuberance is largest, and at other 
“ seasons when it is totally wanting, and the two sexes 
“ shew no difference whatever in the outline of the 
“ profile of the head. I never could ascertain that it 
subserves any special function, and the Indians on the 
‘‘ Amazon know nothing about its use.” These pro- 
tuberances resemble, in their periodical appearance, 
the fleshy carbuncles on the heads of certain birds ; but 
whether they serve as ornaments must remain at present 
doubtful. 

I hear from Professor Agassiz and Dr. Gunther, that 
the males of those fishes, which differ permanently in 
colour from the females, often become more brilliant 
during the breeding-season. This is likewise the case 
wfth a multitude of fishes, the sexes of which are 
identical in colour at all other seasons of the year. 
The tench, roach, and perch may be given as instances. 
The male salmon at this season is “ marked on the 

See also ‘ A Journey in Brazil,’ by Prof, and Mrs. Agassiz, 

1868, p. 220. 


CllAP. XII. 


FISHES. 


521 


“ cheeks with orange-coloured stripes, which give it the 
appearance of a Labrus, and the body partakes of a 
“ golden orange tinge. The females are dark in colour, 
“ and are commonly called black-fish.” An analogous 
and even greater change takes place with the Salmo 
eriox or bull trout; the males of the char {8. umbla) 
are likewise at this season rather brighter in colour 
than the females.^^ The colours of the pike {Esox 
reticulatus) of the United States, especially of the 
male, become, during the breeding-season, exceedingly 
intense, brilliant, and iridescent.^^ Another striking 
instance out of many is afforded by the male stickleback 
(Gasterosteus leiurus), which is described by Mr. War- 
ington,^® as being then “ beautiful beyond description.” 
The back and eyes of the female are simply brown, and 
the belly white. The eyes of the male, on the other 
hand, are “ of the most splendid green, having a 
“ metallic lustre like the green feathers of some 
‘‘ humming-birds. The throat and belly are of a bright 
“ crimson, the back* of an ashy-green, and the whole 
“ fish appears as though it were somewhat translucent 
“ and glowed with an internal incandescence.” After 
the breeding season these colours all change, the throat 
and belly become of a paler red, the back more green, 
and the glowing tints subside. 

With respect to the courtship of fishes, other cases 
have been observed since the first edition of this book 
appeared, besides that already given of the stickleback. 
]\rr. W. S. Kent says that the male of the Labrus mixtus, 

“ Yarrell, ‘British Fishes,’ ^ ‘The American Agricul- 
vol. ii. 1836, pp. 10, 12, 35. turist,’ 1868, p. 100. 

^ W. Thompson, in ‘Annals “ ‘Annals and Mag. of Nat. 
and Mag. of Xat. History,’ voL Hist.’ Oct. 1852. 
vi. 1841, p. 440. 


522 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 11. 


which, as we have seen, differs in colour from the 
female, makes “ a deep hollow in the sand of the tank, 
“ and then endeavours in the most persuasive manner 
“ to induce a female of the same species to share 
“ it with him, swimming backwards and forwards 
“ between her and the completed nest, and plainly 
“exhibiting the greatest anxiety for her to follow.” 
The males of Cantharus hneatus become, during the 
breeding-season, of deep leaden-black ; they then retire 
from the shoal, and excavate a hollow as a nest. 
“ Each male now mounts vigilant guard over his 
“ respective hollow, and vigorously attacks and drives 
“ away any other fish of the same sex. Towards his 
“ companions of the opposite sex his conduct is far 
“ different ; many of the latter are now distended with 
“ spawn, and these he endeavours by all the means in 
“ his power to lure singly to his prepared hollow, and 
“ there to deposit the myriad ova with which they are 
“ laden, which he then protects and guards with the 
“ greatest care.” 

A more striking case of courtship, as well as of 
display, by the males of a Chinese Macropus has 
been given by M. Carbonnier, who carefully observed 
these fishes under confinement.^’ The males are 
• most beautifully coloured, more so than the females. 
During the breeding-season they contend for the pos- 
session of the females ; and, in the act of courtship, ex- 
pand their fins, which are spotted and ornamented with 
brightly coloured rays, in the same manner, according 
to M. Carbonnier, as the peacock. They then also 

“ ‘ Nature,’ May, 1873, p. mat.’ Paris, July 1869, and 
25. Jan. 1870. 

27 "Bull, de la Soc. d’Accii- 


ClIAl*. XII. 


FISHES. 


523 


bound about the females with much vivacity, and 
appear by ‘‘ I’etalage de leurs vives couleurs chercher a 
“ attirer I’attention des femelles, lesquelles ne parais- 
“ saient indifferentes a ce manege, elles nageaient avec 
“ une molle lenteur vers les males et semblaient se 
“ complaire dans leur voisinage.” After the male has 
won his bride, .he makes a little disc of froth by 
blowing air and mucus out of his mouth. He then 
collects the fertilised ova, dropped by the female, in his 
mouth ; and this caused M. Carbonnier much alarm, as 
he thought that they were going to be devoured. But 
the male soon deposits them in the disc of froth, 
afterwards guarding them, repairing the froth, and 
taking care of the young when hatched. I mention 
these particulars because, as we shall presently see, 
there are fishes, the males of which hatch their eggs in 
their mouths ; and those who do not believe in the 
principle of gradual evolution might ask how could such 
a habit have originated ; but the difiiculty is much 
» diminished when we know that there are fishes which 
thus collect and carry the eggs ; for if delayed by any 
cause in depositing them, the habit of hatching them 
in their mouths might have been acquired. 

To return to our more immediate subject. The case 
stands thus : female fishes, as far as I can learn, never 
willingly spawn except in the presence of the males ; 
and the males never fertilise the ova except in the 
presence of the females. The males fight for the 
possession of the females. In many species, the males 
whilst young resemble the females in colour ; but 
when adult become much more brilliant, and retain 
their colours throughout life. In other species the 
males become brighter than the females and otherwise 


524 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


more highly ornamented, only during the season of 
love. The males sedulously court the females, and in 
one case, as we have seen, take pains in displaying their 
beauty before them. Can it he believed that they would 
thus act to no purpose during their courtship ? And 
this would be the case, unless the females exert some 
choice and select those males which please or excite 
them most. If the female exerts such choice, all the 
above facts on the ornamentation of the males become 
at once intelligible by the aid of sexual selection. 

We have next to inquire whether this view of the 
bright colours of certain male fishes having been 
acquired through sexual selection can, through the law 
of the equal transmission of characters to both sexes, 
he extended to those groups in which the males and 
females are brilliant in the same, or nearly the same 
degree and manner. In such a genus as Labrus, which 
includes some of the most splendid fishes in the world — 
for instance, the Peacock Labrus {L. 'pavo)^ described 
with pardonable exaggeration, as formed of polished * 
scales of gold, encrusting lapis-lazuli, rubies, sapphires, 
emeralds, and amethysts — we may, with much pro- 
bability, accept this belief : for we have seen that the 
sexes in at least one species of the genus differ 
greatly in colour. With some fishes, as with many 
of the lowest animals, splendid colours may be the 
direct result of the nature of their tissues and of the 
surrounding conditions, without the aid of selection 
of any kind. The gold-fish {Cyj^rinus auratus), judging 
from the analogy of the golden variety of the common 
carp, is perhaps a case in point, as it may owe its 

Borv de ISamt Vincent, in ‘Diet. Class, dHist. Nat.’ tom. ix. 
1826, p. 151 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


525 


splendid colours to a single abrupt variation, due to the 
conditions to which this fish has been subjected under 
confinement. It is, however, more probable that these 
colours have been intensified through artificial selec- 
tion, as this species has been carefully bred in China 
from a remote period.^® Under natural conditions it 
does not seem probable that beings so highly organised 
as fishes, and which live under such complex relations, 
should become brilliantly coloured without suffering 
some evil or receiving some benefit from so great a 
change, and consequently without the intervention of 
natural selection. 

What, then, are we to conclude in regard to the 
many fishes, both sexes of which are splendidly 
coloured? Mr. Wallace believes that the species 
which frequent reefs, where corals and other brightly- 
coloured organisms abound, are brightly coloured in 
order to escape detection by their enemies; but ac- 
cording to my recollection they were thus rendered 
highly conspicuous. In the fresh-waters of the tropics 
there are no brilliantly-coloured corals or other or- 
ganisms for the fishes to resemble ; yet many species 
in the Amazons are beautifully coloured, and many of 


^ Owing to some remarks on 
this subject, made in my work 
‘On the Variation of Animals 
under Domestication,’ Mr. W. 
F. Mayers (‘ Chinese Notes and 
Queries,’ Aug. 1868, p. 123) has 
searched the ancient Chinese 
encyclopedias. He finds that 
gold-fish were first reared in 
confinement during the Sung 
Dynasty, which commenced 
a.d. 960. In the year 1129 
these fishes abounded. Ip 


another place it is said that 
since the year 1548 there has 
been “ produced at Hangchow a 
“ variety called the fire-fish, 
“ from its intensely red colour. 
“ It is universally admired, and 
“ there is not a household where 
“ it is not cultivated, in rivalry 
“ as to its colour, and as a source 
“ of profit.” 

‘Westminster Review,’ July 
1867, p. 7. 


526 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


the carnivorous Cypriiiidse in India are ornamented 
with “ bright longitudinal lines of various tints.” 
Mr. M‘Clelland, in describing these fishes, goes so far 
as to suppose that ‘‘ the peculiar brilliancy of their 
“ colours ” serves as “a better mark for king-fishers, 
“ terns, and other birds which are destined to keep the 
“ number of these fishes in check ; ” but at the present 
day few naturalists will admit that any animal has 
been made conspicuous as an aid to its own destruc- 
tion. It is possible that certain fishes may have been 
rendered conspicuous in order to warn birds and beasts 
of prey that they were unpalatable, as explained 
when treating of caterpillars ; but it is not, I believe, 
known that any fish, at least any fresh-water fish, 
is r^ected from being distasteful to fish- devouring 
animals. On the whole, the most probable view in 
regard to the fishes, of which both sexes are brilliantly 
coloured, is that their colours were acquired by the 
males as a sexual ornament, and were transferred 
equally, or nearly so, to the other sex. 

We have now to consider whether, when the male 
differs in a marked manner from the female in colour 
or in other ornaments, he alone has been modified, the 
variations being inherited by his male offspring alone ; 
or whether the female has been specially modified and 
rendered inconspicuous for the sake of protection, such 
modifications being inherited only by the females. It 
is impossible to doubt that colour has been gained by 
many fishes as a protection : no one can examine the 
speckled upper surface of a flounder, and overlook its 

resemblance to the sandy bed of the sea on which it 

* 

‘ Indian CyprinidaB,’ by Mr. M‘Clelland, ‘ Asiatic Researches, 
yt)l. xix. part ii. 1839, p. 230, 


Chap XII 


FISHES. 


527 


lives. Certain fishes, moreover, can through the action 
of the nervous system change their colours in adapta- 
tion to surrounding objects, and that within a short 
time.^^ One of the most striking instances ever 
recorded of an animal being protected by its colour (as 
far as it can be judged of in preserved specimens), as 
well as by its form, is that given by Dr. Gunther of a 
pipe-fish, which, with its reddish streaming filaments, 
is hardly distinguishable from the sea-weed to which it 
clings with its prehensile tail. But the question now 
under consideration is whether the females alone have 
been modified for this object. We can see that one sex 
will not be modified through natural selection for the 
sake of protection more than the other, supposing both 
to vary, unless one sex is exposed for a longer period to 
danger, or has less power of escaping from such danger 
than the other ; and it does not appear that with fishes 
the sexes differ in these respects. As far as there is 
any difference, the males, from being generally smaller 
and from wandering more about, are exposed to greater 
danger than the females ; and yet, when the sexes 
differ, the males are almost always the more con- 
spicuously coloured. The ova are fertilised immedi- 
ately after being deposited ; and when this process 
lasts for several days, as in the case of the salmon,^^ 
the female, during the whole time, is attended by the 
male. After the ova are fertilised they are, in most 
cases, left unprotected by both parents, so that the 
males and females, as far as oviposition is concerned, 
are equally exposed to danger, and both are equally 

*2 G. Pouchet, L’Institut. 327, pi. xiv. and xv. 

Nov. 1, 1871, p. 134. Yarrell, ‘ British Fishes/ 

^ ‘Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1865, p. vol. ii. p. 11. 


528 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


important for the production of fertile ova; conse- 
quently the more or less brightly-coloured individuals 
of either sex would be equally liable to be destroyed or 
preserved, and both would have an equal influence on 
the colours of their offspring. 

Certain fishes, belonging to several families, make 
nests, and some of them take care of their young when 
hatched. Both sexes of the bright coloured Grenilabrus 
massa and melops work together in building their nests 
with sea-weed, shells, &c.^® But the males of certain 
fishes do all the work, and afterwards take exclusive 
charge of the young. This is the case with the dull- 
coloured gobies,^® in which the sexes are not known to 
differ in colour, and likewise with the sticklebacks 
(Gasterosteus), in which the males become brilliantly 
coloured during the spawning season. The male of the 
smooth-tailed stickleback (G. leiurus) performs the 
duties of a nurse with exemplary care and vigilance 
during a long time, and is continually employed in 
gently leading hack the young to the nest, when they 
stray too far. He courageously drives away all enemies 
including the females of his own species. It would 
indeed be no small relief to the male, if the female, 
after depositing her eggs, were immediately devoured 
by some enemy, for he is forced incessantly to drive 
her from the nest.^^ 

The males of certain other fishes inhabiting South 
America and Ceylon, belonging to two distinct Orders, 

^ According to the observa- ^ See Mr. Warington’s most 
tions of M., Gerbe; see Giin- interesting description of the 
ther’s ‘ Record of Zoolog. Litera- habits of the Oasterosteus leiurus, 
ture,’ 1865, p. 194. in ‘ Annals and Mag. of Nat. 

Cuvier, ‘Regne Animal,* Hist.’ November 18t^0, 
voh ii. X829, p. 2iZ, 


Chap. XII. 


FISHES. 


529 


have the extraordinary habit of hatching within their 
mouths, or branchial cavities, the eggs laid by the 
females.^® I am informed by Professor Agassiz that 
the males of the Amazonian species which follow this 
habit, “not only are generally brighter than the 
“ females, but the diifference is greater at the spawning- 
“ season than at any other time.” The species of Geo- 
phagus act in the same manner ; and in this genus, a 
conspicuous protuberance becomes developed on the 
forehead of the males during the breeding-season. 
With the various species of Chromids, as Professor 
Agassiz likewise informs me, sexual differences in 
colour may be observed, “ whether they lay their eggs 
“ in the water among aquatic plants, or deposit them in 
“ holes, leaving them to come out without further care, 
“ or build shallow nests in the river mud, over which 
“ they sit, as our Pomotis does. It ought also to be 
“ observed that these sitters are among the brightest 
“ species in their respective families ; for instance, 
“ Hygrogonus is bright green, with large black ocelli, 
“ encircled with the most brilliant red.” Whether 
with all the species of Chromids it is the male alone 
which sits on the eggs is not known. It is, however, 
manifest that the fact of the eggs being protected 
or unprotected by the parents, has had little or no 
influence on the differences in colour between the 
sexes. It is further manifest, in all the cases in which 
the males take exclusive charge of the nests and young, 
that the destruction of the brighter-coloured males 
would be far more iuflaeutial on the character of the 

Prof. W} miin, in ‘ Proc. Pbys.’ Nov. 1, 1866, p. 78. Dr. 
Boston Soc. of Nat. Hist.’ Sept. Giinther has likewise described 
15, 1857. Also Prof. Turner, other cases, 
in ‘Journal of Anatomy and .. 


530 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


race, than the destruction of the brighter-coloured 
females ; for the death of the male during the period of 
incubation or nursing would entail the death of the 
young, so that they could not inherit his peculiarities ; 
yet, in many of these very cases the males are more 
conspicuously coloured than the females. 

In most of the Lophohranchii (Pipe-fish, Hippo- 
campi, &c.) the males have either marsupial sacks or 
hemispherical depressions on the abdomen, in which 
the ova laid by the female are hatched. The males 
also shew great attachment to their young.^® The 
sexes do not commonly differ much in colour ; but Dr. 
Gunther believes that the male Hippocampi are rather 
brighter than the females. The genus Solenostoma, 
however, offers a curious exceptional case,'^® for the 
female is much more vividly-coloured and spotted than 
the male, and she alone has a marsupial sack and 
hatches the eggs ; so that the female of Solenostoma 
differs from all the other Lophohranchii in this latter 
respect, and from almost all other fishes, in being more 
brightly-coloured than the male. It is improbable 
that this remarkable double inversion of character in 
the female should be an accidental coincidence. As the 
males of several fishes, which take exclusive charge of 
the eggs and young, are more brightly coloured than 
the females, and as here the female Solenostoma takes 
the same charge and is brighter than the male, it 
might be argued that the conspicuous colours of that 
sex which is the more important of the two for the 


Yari-ell, ‘ Hist, of British 
Fishes,’ vol. ii. 1836, pp. 329, 
338. • 

Dr. Gilnther, siace publish- 
ug an account of this species in 


‘ The Fishes of Zanzibar,’ by 
Col. Playfair, 1866, p. 137, has 
re-examined the specimens, and 
has given me the above informa- 
tion. 


CiiAP. XII. 


FISHES. 


531 


welfare of the offspring, must be in some manner 
protective. But from the large number of fishes, of 
which the males are either permanently or periodically 
brighter than the females, but whose life is not at all 
more important for the welfare of the species than that 
of the female, this view can hardly he maintained. 
When we treat of birds we shall meet with analogous 
cases, where there has been a complete inversion of the 
usual attributes of the two sexes, and we shall then 
give what appears to be the probable explanation, 
namely, that the males have selected the more attrac- 
tive females, instead of the latter having selected, in 
accordance with the usual rule throughout the animal 
kingdom, the more attractive males. 

On the whole we may conclude, that with most fishes, 
in which the sexes differ in colour or in other orna- 
mental characters, the males originally varied, with 
their variations transmitted to the same sex, and 
accumulated through sexual selection by attracting 
or exciting the females. In many cases, however, such 
characters have been transferred, either partially or com- 
pletely, to the females. In other cases, again, both sexes 
have been coloured alike for the sake of protection ; but 
in no instance does it appear that the female alone has 
had her colours or other characters specially modified 
for this latter purpose. 

The last point which need be noticed is that fishes 
are known to make various noises, some of which are 
described as being musical. Dr. Dufosse, who has 
especially attended to this subject, says that the 
sounds are voluntarily produced in several ways by 
different fishes : by the friction of the pharyngeal bones 
— by the vibration of certain muscles attached to the 


532 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut II. 


swim-bladder, wliich serves as a resounding board — and 
by the vibration of the intrinsic muscles of the swim- 
bladder. By this latter means the Trigla produces 
pure and long-drawn sounds which range over nearly 
an octave. But the most interesting case for us is 
that of two species of Ophidium, in which the males alone 
are provided with a sound-producing apparatus, con- 
sisting of small movable bones, with proper muscles, in 
connection with the swim-bladder.'*^ The drumming 
of the Umbrinas in the European seas is said to be 
audible from a depth of twenty fathoms ; and the 
fishermen of Kochelle assert “ that the males alone 
“ make the noise during the spawning-time ; and that 
“ it is possible by imitating it, to take them without 
“ bait.” From this statement, and more especially 
from the case of Ophidium, it is almost certain that in 
this, the lowest class of the Vertebrata, as with so many 
insects and spiders, sound-producing instruments have, 
at least in some cases, been developed through sexual 
selection, as a means for bringing the sexes together. 


Amphibians. 

Urodela . — I will begin with the tailed amphibians. 
The sexes of salamanders or newts often differ much 
both in colour and structure. In some species pre- 
hensile claws are developed on the fore-legs of the 

‘ Comptes Kendus.’ Tom. Zouteveen, in the Dutch trans- 
xlvi. 1858, p. 353. Tom. xlvii. lation of this work (vol. ii., p. 
1858, p. 916. Tom. liv. 1862, 36), gives some further particu- 

p. 393. The noise made by the lars on the sounds made by 
Umbrinas (Scixna aquila), is tishes. 

said by some authors to be The Kev. 0. Kingsley, in 

more like that of a flute or ‘ Nature,* May 1870, p. 40. 
organ, than drumming : Dr. 


CitAP. XII 


AMPHIBIANS. 


583 


males during the breeding-season : and at this season 
in the male Triton palmipes the hind-feet are provided 
with a swimming-web, which is almost completely 
absorbed during the winter ; so that their feet then 
resemble those of the female."*^ This structure no 
doubt aids the male in his eager search and pursuit of 
the female. Whilst courting her he rapidly vibrates 
the end of his tail. With our common newts {Triton 
pu7ictatus and eristatiis) a deep, much indented crest is 



F'g. 32 . Triton cristatus (half natural size, from Bell’s ‘British Reptiles’). 
Upper figure, male daring the breeding season ; lower figure, female. 


developed along the back and tail of the male during 
the breeding-season, which disappears during the 
winter. Mr. St. George Mivart informs me that it is 
not furnished with muscles, and therefore cannot be 
used for locomotion. As during the season of courtship 
it becomes edged with bright colours, there can hardly 
be a doubt that it is a masculine ornament. In many 
species the body presents strongly contrasted, though 

" Bell, ‘ History ol' British Ueptiles,’ 2nd edit. 1849, pp. 15G-159. 


534 


THE DESCENI OF MAN. 


Past II. 


lurid tints, and these become more vivid during the 
breeding-season. The male, for instance, of our 
common little newt {Triton punctatm) is “ brownish- 
“grey above, passing into yellow beneath, which in 
“ the spring becomes a rich bright orange, marked 
“everywhere with round dark spots.” The edge of 
the crest also is then tipped with bright red or violet. 
The female is usually of a yellowish-brown colour with 
scattered brown dots, and the lower surface is often 
quite plain.^^ The young are obscurely tinted. The 
ova are fertilised during the act of deposition, and are 
not subsequently tended by either parent. We may 
therefore conclude that the males have acquired their 
strongly- marked colours and ornamental appendages 
through sexual selection ; these being transmitted 
either to the male offspring alone, or to both sexes. 

Anura or Batrachia . — With many frogs and toads 
the colours evidently serve as a protection, such as 
the bright green tints of tree frogs and the obscure 
mottled shades of many terrestrial species. The most 
conspicuously-coloured toad which I ever saw, the 
Phryniscus nigricans , had the whole upper surface 
of the body as black as ink, with the soles of the feet 
and parts of the abdomen spotted with the brightest 
vermilion. It crawled about the bare sandy or open 
grassy plains of La Plata under a scorching sun, and 
could not fail to catch the eye of every passing creature. 
These colours are probably beneficial by making this 
animal known to all birds of prey as a nauseous mouthful. 

^ Bell, ‘ History of British ^ ‘ Zoology of the Voyage of 
Eeptiles/ 2nd edit. 1849, pp. the “Beagle,”’ 1843. Bell, 
146, 151. ibid. p. 49. 


Chap. XII. 


AMPHIBIANS. 


535 


In Nicaragua there is a little frog dressed in a 

bright livery of red and blue ” which does not 
conceal itself like most other species, but hops about 
during the daytime, and Mr. Belt says that as soon 
as he saw its happy sense of security, he felt sure that 
it was uneatable. After several trials he succeeded in 
tempting a young duck to snatch up a young one, but 
it was instantly rejected ; and the duck “ went about 
“jerking its head, as if trying to throw off some 
“ unpleasant taste.” 

With respect to sexual differences of colour. Dr. 
Gunther does not know of any striking instance either 
with frogs or toads ; yet he can often distinguish the 
male from the female by the tints of the former being 
a little more intense. Nor does he know of any strik- 
ing difference in external structure between the sexes, 
excepting the prominences which become developed 
during the breeding-season on the front legs of the 
male, by which he is enabled to hold the female^^ It 
is surprising that these animals have not acquired 
more strongly-marked sexual characters ; for though 
cold-blooded their passions are strong. Dr. Gunther 
informs me that he has several times found an unfortu- 
nate female toad dead and smothered from having been 
so closely embraced by three or four males. Frogs 
have been observed by Professor Hoffman in Giessen 
fighting all day long during the breeding- season, and 
with so much violence that one had its body ripped open. 

^ ‘ The Naturalist in Nicara- ties on the thorax and certain 
gua,’ 1874, p. 321. rugosities on the fingers, which 

The male alone of the Bufo perhaps subserve the same end 
sikimmensis (Dr. Anderson, as the above-mentioned promi- 
‘Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1871, p. nences. 

201) has two pl‘ite-like callosi- 


536 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part. II 


Frogs and toads offer one interesting sexual differ- 
ence, namely, in me musical powers possessed by the 
males ; but to speak of music, when applied to the 
discordant and overwhelming sounds emitted by male 
bull-frogs and some other species, seems, according 
to our taste, a singularly inappropriate expression. 
'Nevertheless, certain frogs sing in a decidedly pleasing 
manner. Near Kio Janeiro I used often to sit in the 
evening to listen to a number of little Hylae, perched 
on blades of grass close to the water, which sent forth 
sweet chirping notes in harmony. The various sounds 
are emitted chiefly by the males during the breeding- 
season, as in the case of the croaking of our common 
frog."*® In accordance with this fact the vocal organs 
of the males are more highly-developed than those of 
the females. In some genera the males alone are 
provided with sacs which open into the larynx.^® For 
instance, in the edible frog (Bana esculenta) “ the sacs 
“ are peculiar to the males, and become, when filled 
“ with air in the act of croaking, large globular 
“ bladders, standing out one on each side of the head, 
‘'near the corners of the mouth.” The croak of the 
male is thus rendered exceedingly powerful ; whilst 
that of the female is only a slight groaning noise.®® 
In the several genera of the family the vocal organs 
differ considerably in structure, and their development 
in all cases may be attributed to sexual selection. 

Bell. ‘ History of British Cyclop, of Anat. and Phys.’ voL 
Reptiles,’ X849, p. 98. iv. p. 1603. 

J. Bishop, in ‘ Todd’s Bell, ibid. pp. ll‘J-114- 


Chap. XIL 


REPTILES. 


537 


Eeptiles. 

Tortoises and turtles do not offer well- 
marked sexual differences. In some species, the tale of 
the male is longer than that of the female. In some, 
the plastron or lower surface of the shell of the male 
is slightly concave in relation to the back of the 
female. The male of the mud-turtle of the United 
States (Chrifsemys ficta) has claws on its front feet 
twice as long as those of the female; and these are 
used when the sexes unite. With the huge tortoise 
of the Galapagos Islands (Testudo nigra) the males are 
said to grow to a larger size than the females : during 
the pairing-season, and at no other time, the male 
utters a hoarse bellowing noise, which can be heard 
at the distance of more than a hundred yards ; the 
female, on the other hand, never uses her voice. 

With the Testudo elegans of India, it is said “ that the 
“ combats of the males may be heard at some distance, 
“ from the nois^ they produce in butting against each 
‘ other.” 

Crocodilia . — The sexes apparently do not differ in 
colour ; nor do I know that the males fight together, 
though this is probable, for some kinds make a pro- 
digious display before the females. Bartram de- 
scribes the male alligator as striving to win the female 
by splashing and roaring in the midst of a lagoon, 
“ swollen to an extent ready to burst, with its head 
‘ and tail lifted up, he springs or twirls round on the 

Mr. C. J. Maynard, ‘ The the « Beagle,”’ 1845, p. 384. 
Amercian Naturalist,’ Dec. “ Dr. Giinther, ‘ Reptiles of 
1869, p. 555. British India,’ 1864, p. 7. 

® See my ‘Journal of Re- ^ ‘ Travels through Carolina,’ 
searches during the Voyage of &c., 1791, p. 128. 


538 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


“ surface of the water, like an Indian chief rehearsing 
his feats of war.” During the season of love, a musky 
odour is emitted by the submaxiliary glands of the 
crocodile, and pervades their haunts.®^ 

Ophidia. — Dr. Gunther informs me that the males 
are always smaller than the females, and generally have 
longer and slenderer tails ; but he knows of no other 
diiBference in external structure. In regard to colour, 
he can almost always distinguish the male from the 
female by his more strongly-pronounced tints ; thus 
the black zigzag band on the back of the male English 
viper is more distinctly defined than in the female. 
The difference is much plainer in the rattle-snakes of 
N. America, the male of which, as the keeper in the 
Zoological Gardens shewed me, can at once be distin- 
guished from the female by having more lurid yellow 
about its whole body. In S. Africa the Bucephalus 
capensis presents an analogous difference, for the 
female “ is never so fully variegated with yellow on 
“ the sides as the male.” The male of the Indian 
Dipsas cynodon, on the other hand, is blackish-brown, 
with the belly partly black, whilst the female is reddish 
or yellowish-olive, with the belly either uniform yellow- 
ish or marbled with black. In the Tragops dispar of 
the same country the male is bright green, and the 
female bronze-coloured.^’ No doubt the colours of some 
snakes are protective, as shewn by the green tints 'of 
tree-snakes, and the various mottled shades of the 
species which live in sandy places ; but it is doubtful 
whether the colours of many kinds, for instance of the 

^ Owen, ‘Anatomy of Verte- pi. x. 
brates,’ vol. i. 1866, p. 615. Dr. A. Gunther, ‘Reptiles 

^ Sir Andrew Smith, ‘ Zoolog. of British India,’ Ray Soc. 1864. 
of S. Africa : Reptilia,’ 1849, pp. 304, 308. 


Chap. XII. 


KEPTILES. 


539 


common English snake and viper, serve to conceal 
them ; and this is still more doubtful with the many 
foreign species which are coloured with extreme 
elegance. The colours of certain species are very 
different in the adult and young states.®® 

During the breeding-season the anal scent-glands of 
snakes are in active function ; and so it is with the 
same glands in lizards, and as we have seen with the 
submaxiliary glands of crocodiles. As the males of 
most animals search for the females, these odoriferous 
glands probably serve to excite or charm the female, 
rather than to guide her to the spot where the male 
may be found. Male snakes, though appearing so 
sluggish, are amorous ; for many have been observed 
crowding round the same female, and even round her 
dead body. They are not known to fight together from 
rivalry. Their intellectual powers are higher than 
might have been anticipated. In the Zoological Gardens 
they soon learn not to strike at the iron bar with which 
their cages are cleaned ; and Dr. Keen of Philadelphia 
informs me that some snakes which he kept learned after 
four or five times to avoid a noose, with which they were 
at first easily caught. An excellent observer in Ceylon, 
Mr. E. Layard, saw a cobra thrust its head through a 
narrow hole and swallow a toad. “ With this encum- 
“ brance he could not withdraw himself ; finding this, 
“ he reluctantly disgorged the precious morsel, which 
“ began to move off ; this was too much for snake 
“philosophy to bear, and the toad was again seized. 
“ and again was the snake, after violent efforts to 

“ Dr. Stoliczka, ‘ Journal of brates,’ vol. i. 1866, p. 615. 
Asiatic Soc. of Bengal,’ vol. ‘Kambles in Ceylon/ in 

xxxix. 1870, pp. 205, 211. ‘ Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ 

Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Verte- 2nd series, vol. ix. 1852, p. 333 


540 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Part II 


“ escape, compelled to part with its prey. This time, 
“ however, a lesson had been learnt, and the toad was 
‘ seized by one leg withdrawn, and then swallowed in 
“ triumph.” 

The keeper in the Zoological Gardens is positive 
that certain snakes, for instance Crotalus and Python, 
distinguish him from all other persons. Cobras kept 
together in the same cage apparently feel some attach- 
ment towards each other.®^ 

It does not, however, follow because snakes have 
some reasoning power, strong passions and mutual 
affection, that they should likewise be endowed with 
sufficient taste to admire brilliant colours in their 
partners, so as to lead to the adornment of the species 
through sexual selection. Nevertheless, it is difficult 
to account in any other manner for the extreme beauty 
of certain species ; for instance, of the coral-snakes of 
S. America, which are of a rich red with black and 
yellow transverse bands. I well remember how much 
surprise I felt at the beauty of the first coral- snake 
which I saw gliding across a path in Brazil. Snakes 
coloured in this peculiar manner, as Mr. Wallace states 
on the authority of Dr. Gunther,®^ are found nowhere 
else in the world except in S. America, and here no 
less than four genera occur. One of these, Elaps, is 
venomous ; a second and widely-distinct genus is 
doubtfully venomous, and the two others are quite 
harmless." The species belonging to these distinct 
genera inhabit the same districts, and are so like each 
other that no one “ but a naturalist would distinguish 
“ the harmless from the poisonous kinds.” Hence, as 

Dr. Gunther, ‘ Eeptiles of ‘ Westminster Keview, 

P>ritish India,’ 1864, p. 340 July 1st, 1867, p. 32. 


Chap. XII. 


REPTILES. 


541 


Mr. Wallace believes, the innocuous kinds have 
probably acquired their colours as a protection, on the 
principle of imitation ; for they would naturally be 
thought dangerous by their enemies. The cause, 
however, of the bright colours of the venomous Elaps 
remains to be explained, and this may perhaps be 
sexual selection. 

Snakes produce other sounds besides hissing. The 
deadly Echis carinata has on its sides some oblique 
rows of scales of a peculiar structure with serrated 
edges ; and when this snake is excited these scales are 
rubbed against each other, which produces “ a curious 
“ prolonged, almost hissing sound.” With respect 
to the rattling of the rattle-snake, we have at last 
some definite information : for Professor Aughey 
states,®^ that on two occasions, being himself unseen, 
he watched from a little distance a rattle-snake coiled 
up with head erect, which continued to rattle at short 
intervals for half an hour : and at last he saw another 
snake approach, and when they met they paired. 
Hence he is satisfied that one of the uses of the rattle 
is to bring the sexes together. Unfortunately he did 
not ascertain whether it was the male or the female 
which remained stationary and called for the other. 
But it by no means follows from the above fact that 
the rattle may not be of use to these snakes in other 
ways, as a warning to animals which would otherwise 
attack them. Nor can I quite disbelieve the several 
accounts which have appeared of their thus paralysing 
their prey with fear. Some other snakes also make a 
distinct noise by rapidly vibrating their tails against 

Dr. Anderson, ‘ Proc. Zoolog. ‘ 'J'he American Naturalist,' 

Soc.’ 1871, p. 196. 1873, p. 85. 


542 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


the surrounding stalks of plants ; and I have myself 
heard this in the case of a Trigonocephalus in S. 
America. 

LaceHilia . — The males of some, probably of many 
kinds of lizards, fight together from rivalry. Thus the 
arboreal Anolis cristatellus of S. America is extremely 
pugnacious : ‘‘ During the spring and early part of the 
“ summer, two adult males rarely meet without a 
“ contest. On first seeing one another, they nod their 
“heads up and down three or four times, and at the 
“ same time expanding the frill or pouch beneath the 
“ throat ; their eyes glisten with rage, and after 
“ waving their tails from side to side for a few seconds, 
“ as if to gather energy, they dart at each other 
“ furiously, rolling over and over, and holding firmly 
“ with their teeth. The conflict generally ends in one 
“of the combatants losing his tail, which is often 
“ devoured by the victor.” The male of this species is 
considerably larger than the female ; and this, as far 
as Dr. Gunther has been able to ascertain, is the 
general rule with lizards of all kinds. The male 
alone of the Gyrtodactylus ruhidus of the Andaman 
Islands possesses pre-anal pores; and these pores, 
judging from analogy, probably serve to emit an 
odour.®® 

The sexes often differ greatly in various external 
characters. The male of the above-mentioned Anolis 
is furnished with a crest which runs along the back 
and tail, and can be erected at pleasure; but of this 
crest the female does not exhibit a trace. In the 

Mr. N. L. Austen kept these Stoliczka, ‘ Journal of 

animals alive for a considerable Asiatic Soc. of Bengal,’ vol 
time ; see ‘ Land and Water,’ xxxiv. 1870, p. 166. 

July 1867, p. 9. 


CHAr. XII. 


REPTILES. 


543 


Indian Oophotis cei/lamea, the female has a dorsal crest, 
though much less developed than in the male ; and so 
it is, as Dr. Gunther informs me, with the females of 
many Iguanas, Chameleons, and other lizards. In some 
species, however, the crest is equally developed in both 
sexes, as in the Iguana tuherculata. In the genus 
Sitana, the males alone are furnished with a large 
throat-pouch (fig. 33), which can he folded up like a 
fan, and is coloured blue, black, and red ; but these 
splendid colours are exhibited only during the pairing- 
season. The female does not possess even a rudiment 
of this appendage. In the 
Anolis cristatellus, accord- 
ing to Mr. Austen, the 
throat pouch, which is 
bright red marbled with 
yellow, is present in the 
female, though in a rudi- 
mental condition. Again, 
in certain other lizards, 
both sexes are equallv vonch expanded (from Giinthvr's 

^ ‘Reptiles of India*). 

well provided with throat 

pouches. Here we see with species belonging to 
the same group, as in so many previous cases, the 
same character either confined to the, males, or more 
largely developed in them than in the females, or 
again equally developed in both sexes. The little 
lizards of the genus Draco, which glide through the 
air on their rib-supported parachutes, and which in 
the beauty of their colours baffle description, are 
furnished with skinny appendages to the throat “ like 
the wattles of gallinaceous birds.” These become 
erected when the animal is excited. They occur in 



544 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IJ 


both sexes, but are best developed when the male 
arrives at maturity, at which age the middle appendage 
is sometimes twice as long as the head. Most of the 
species likewise have a low crest running along the 
neck ; and this is much more developed in the full- 
grown males than in the females or young males.®^ 

A Chinese species is said to live in pairs during the 
spring ; “ and if one is caught, the other falls from the 
‘‘ tree to the ground, and allows itself to be captured 
“with impunity,”— I presume 
from despair.®® 

There are other and much 
more remarkable differences 
between the sexes of certain 
lizards. The male of Gera- 
tophora aspera bears on the 
extremity of his snout an ap- 
pendage half as long as the 
head. It is cylindrical, covered 
with scales, flexible, and ap- 

Fig. 34. Ceratophora Stoddartii. j.* 

Upper figure, male ; lower figure, parently Capable ol erection I 
in the female it is quite rudi- 
mental. In a second species of the same genus a 
terminal scale forms a minute horn on the summit 
of the flexible appendage ; and in a third species 
iC. Stoddartii, fig. 34) the whole appendage is 
converted into a horn, which is usually of a white 
colour, but assumes a purplish tint when the animal is 

All the foregoing statements himself, or from his magnificent 
and quotations, in regard to work on the ‘ Reptiles of British 
Cophotis, Bitana and Draco, as India,’ Ray Soc. 1864, pp. 122, 
well as the following facts in 130, 135. ’ 

regard to Ceratophora and Cha- ®**Mr. Swinhoe, ‘ Proc. Zoolog. 
ma3leon, are from Dr. Giinther Soc.’ 1870, p. 240. 



Chap. XII. 


REPTILES. 


545 



excited. In the adult male of this latter species the 
horn is half an inch in length, but it is of quite 
minute size in the female and in the young. These 
appendages, as Dr. Gunther has remarked to me, may 


Fig. 36. Chamaeleo Wfurcns. Upper figure, male; lower figure, female. 

be compared with the combs of gallinaceous birds, and 
apparently serve as ornaments. 

In the genus Chamaeleon we come to the acme of 
difference between the sexes. The upper part of the 
skull of the male G. Ufurcus (fig. 35), an inhabitant of 

2 N 


546 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


Madagascar, is produced into two great, solid, bony 
projections, covered with scales like the rest of the 
head ; and of this wonderful modification of structure 
the female exhibits only a rudiment. Again, in 
Ghamaeleo Owenii (fig. 36), from the West Coast of 
' Africa, the male bears on his snout and forehead three 
curious horns, of which the female has not a trace. 
These horns consist of an excrescence of bone covered 
with a smooth sheath, forming part of the general 



Fig. 36. Chamseleo Owenii. Upper figure, male ; lower figure, female. 

integuments of the body, so that they are identical in 
structure with those of a bull, goat, or other sheath- 
horned ruminant. Although the three horns differ so 
much in appearance from the two great prolongations 
of the skull in G. hifureus, we can hardly doubt that 
they serve the same general purpose in the economy of 
these two animals. The first conjecture, which will 
occur to every one, is that they are used by the males 
for fighting together ; and as these animals are very 


Chap. XII. 


REPTILES. 


547 ■ 


quarrelsome,®® this is probably a correct view. Mr. T. 
W. Wood also informs me that he once watched two 
individuals of C. pumilus fighting violently on the 
branch of a tree; they flung their heads about and 
tried to bite each other; they then rested for a time 
and afterwards continued their battle. 

With many lizards the sexes differ slightly in'colour, 
the tints and stripes of the males being brighter 
and more distinctly defined than in the females. 
This, for instance, is the case with the above Cophotis 
and with the Acanthodactylus ca'pemis of S. Africa. In 
a Cordylus of the latter country, the male is either 
much redder or greener than the female. In the 
Indian Calotes mgrilahris there is a still greater differ- 
ence ; the lips also of the male are black, whilst those 
of the female are green. In our common little vivipar- 
ous lizard (Zootoca vivipara) “ the under side of the 
“ body and base of the tail in the male are bright 
“ orange, spotted with black ; in the female these parts 
“ are pale-greyish-green without spots.” We have 
seen that the males alone of Sitana possess a throat-' 
pouch ; and this is splendidly tinted with blue, black, 
and red. In the Froctotretus tenuis of Chile the male 
alone is marked with spots of blue, green, and coppery- 
red.'^^ In many cases the males retain the same, colours 
throughout the year, but in others they become much 
brighter during the breeding-season ; I may give as an 


Dr. Bucholz, ‘ Monatsbe- 
richt K. Preuss. Akad.’ Jan. 
1874, p. 78. 

Bell, ‘ History of British 
Reptiles,’ 2nd edit. 1849, p. 40. 

” For Proctotretus see ‘ Zoo- 
logy of the Voyage of the 
“Beagle”: Reptiles,’ by Mr. 


Bell, p. 8. For the Lizards of 
S. Africa, see * Zoology of S. 
Africa : Reptiles,’ by Sir Andrew 
Smith, pi. 25 and 39. For the 
Indian Calotes, see ‘ Reptiles of 
British India,’ by Dr. Gunther, 
p. 143. 


548 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part U. 


additional instance the Caiotes maria, which at this 
season has a bright red nead, the rest of the body- 
being green.’^ 

Both sexes of many species are beautifully coloured 
exactly alike ; and there is no reason to suppose that 
such colours are protective. No doubt with the bright 
green kinds which live in the midst of vegetation, this 
colour serves to conceal them ; and in N. Patagonia I 
saw a lizard {Proctotretus multimaeulatus) which, when 
frightened, flattened its body, closed its eyes, and then 
from its mottled tints was hardly distinguishable from 
the surrounding sand. But the bright colours with 
which so many lizards are ornamented, as well as their 
various curious appendages, were probably acquired by 
the males as an attraction, and then transmitted either 
to their male offspring alone, or to both sexes. Sexual 
selection, indeed, seems to have played almost as im- 
portant a part with reptiles as with birds ; and the 
less conspicuous colours of the females in comparison 
with the males cannot be accounted for, as Mr. Wallace 
believes to be the case with birds, by the greater 
exposure of the females to danger during incubation. 

Gunther in ‘ Proc. Zoolog. 8oc.’ 1870, p. 778, with a coloured 
figure. 


Chap. XIII. 


BIRDS. 


549 


CHAPTER Xm. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Birds, 

Sexual differences — Law of battle — Special weapons — Vocal organs 
— Instrumental music — Love-antics and dances — Decorations, 
permanent and seasonal — Double and single annual moults — 
Display of ornaments by the males. 

Secondary sexual characters are more diversified and 
conspicuous in birds, though not perhaps entailing 
more important changes of structure, than in any other 
class of animals. I shall, therefore, treat the subject 
at considerable length. Male birds sometimes, though 
rarely, possess special weapons for fighting with each 
other. They charm the female by vocal or instru- 
mental music of the most varied kinds. They are 
ornamented by all sorts of combs, wattles, protuber- 
ances, horns, air-distended sacks, top-knots, naked 
shafts, plumes and lengthened feathers gracefully 
springing from all parts of the body. The beak and 
naked skin about the head, and the feathers, are often 
gorgeously coloured. The males sometimes pay their 
court by dancing, or by fantastic antics performed either 
on the ground or in the air. Jn one instance, at least, 
the male emits a musky odour, which we may suppose 
serves to charm or excite the female ; for that excellent 
observer, Mr. Ramsay,^ says of the Australian musk-duck 

' ‘Ibis,’ vol. iii. (new series), 1867, p. 414, 


550 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut II. 


{Biziura lobata) that the smell which the male emits 
“ during the summer months is confined to that sex, 
“ and in some individuals is retained throughout the 
“year; I have never, even in the breeding-season, 
“ shot a female which had any smell of musk.” So 
powerful is this odour during the pairing-season, that 
it can be detected long before the bird can be seen.^ 
On the whole, birds appear to be the most aesthetic of 
all animals, excepting of course man, and they have 
nearly the same taste for the beautiful as we have. 
This is shewn by our enjoyment of the singing of 
birds, and 'by our women, both civilised and savage, 
decking their heads with borrowed plumes, and using 
gems which are hardly more brilliantly coloured than 
the naked skin and wattles of certain birds. In man, 
however, when cultivated, the sense of beauty is 
manifestly a far more complex feeling, and is associated 
with various intellectual ideas. 

Before treating of the sexual characters with which we 
are here more particularly concerned, I may just allude 
to certain differences between the sexes which appa- 
rently depend on differences in their habits of life ; for 
such cases, though common in the lower, are rare in the 
higher classes. Two humming-birds belonging to the 
genus Eustephanus, which inhabit the island of Juan 
Fernandez, were long thought to be specifically 
distinct, but are now known, as Mr. Gould informs me, 
to be the male and female of the same species, and 
they difier slightly in the form of the beak. In 
another genus of humming-birds (Grijpus), the beak of 
the male is serrated along the margin and hooked at 

2 Gould, ‘Handbook to the Birds of Australia,’ 1865, vol. ii. 
p. 383. 


Chap. XIII. 


LAW OF BATTLE. 


551 


the extremity, thus differing much from that of the 
female. In the Neomorpha of New Zealand, there is, 
as we have seen, a still wider difference in the form of 
the beak in relation to the manner of feeding of 
the two sexes. Something of the same kind has been 
observed with the goldfinch {Garduelis elegans), for 1 
am assured by Mr. J. Jenner Weir that the bird- 
catchers can distinguish the males by their slightly 
longer beaks. The flocks of males are often found 
feeding on the seeds of the teazle (Dipsacus), which they 
can reach with their elongated beaks, whilst the females 
more commonly feed on the seeds of the betony or 
Scrophularia. With a slight difference of this kind 
as a foundation, we can see how the beaks of the two 
sexes might be made to differ greatly through natural 
selection. In some of the above cases, however, it is 
possible that the beaks of the males may have been 
first modified in relation to their contests with other 
males ; and that this afterwards led to slightly changed 
habits of life. 

Law of Battle . — Almost all male birds are extremely 
pugnacious, using their beaks, wings, and legs for fight- 
ing together. We see this every spring with our robins 
and sparrows. The smallest of all birds, namely the 
humming-bird, is one of the most quarrelsome. Mr. 
Gosse ^ describes a battle in which a pair seized hold of 
each other’s beaks, and whirled round and round, till 
they almost fell to the ground ; and M. Montes de Oca, 
in speaking of another genus of humming-bird, says that 
two males rarely meet without a fierce aerial encounter : 

® Quoted by Mr. Gould, ‘ Introduction to the Trochilidje,’ 1861, 


552 


THE DESCENT OE MAN. 


Part II. 


when kept in cages “ their fighting has mostly ended 
“in the splitting of the tongue of one of the two, 
“ which then surely dies from being unable to feed.” * 
With Waders, the males of the common water-hen 
(GalUnula chloropus) “ when pairing, fight violently for 
“ the females : they stand nearly upright in the water 
“and strike with their feet.” Two were seen to be 
thus engaged for half an hour, until one got hold of 
the head of the other, which would have been killed 
had not the observer interfered ; the female all the time 
looking on as a quiet spectator.® Mr. Blyth informs me 
that the males of an allied bird (Gallicrex cristatus) 
are a third larger than the females, and are so pugna- 
cious during the breeding-season that they are kept by 
the natives of Eastern Bengal for the sake of fight- 
ing. Various other birds are kept in India for the 
same purpose, for instance, the bulbuls {Pycnonotus 
hsemorrhous) which “ fight with great spirit.” ® 

The polygamous rufi* {Machetes pug^iax, fig. 37) is 
notorious for his extreme pugnacity ; and in the spring, 
the males, which are considerably larger than the 
females, congregate day after day at a particular, spot, 
where the females propose to lay their eggs. The 
fowlers discover these spots by the turf being trampled 
somewhat bare. Here they fight very much like game- 
cocks, seizing each other with their beaks and striking 
with their wings. The great rufi* of feathers round 
the neck is then erected, and according to Col. Montagu 
“ sweeps the ground as a shield to defend the more 
tender parts ; ” and this is the only instance known to 
me in the case of birds of any structure serving as a 

* Gould, ibid. p. 52. p. 327. 

® W. Thompson, ‘Nat. Hist. ® Jerdon, ‘Birds of India,’ 
of Ireland : Birds,’ vol. ii. 1850, 1863, vol. ii. p. 96. 


Chap. XIII. LAW OF BATTLE. 553 

shield. The ruff of feathers, however, from its varied 
and rich colours probably serves in chief part as an 



ornament. Like most pugnacious birds, they seem 
always ready to fight, and when closely confined, often 


Fig. S7. The Ruff or Machetes pugnax (from Brehm’s ‘ Thierleben ’), 


554 


THE DESCENT OP MAN 


pabt n. 


kill each other ; but Montagu observed that their 
pugnacity becomes greater during the spring, when the 
long feathers on their necks are fully developed ; and 
at this period the least movement by any one bird 
provokes a general battle.'^ Of the pugnacity of web- 
footed birds, two instances will suffice : in Guiana 
“ bloody fights occur during the breeding-season 
“between the males of the wild musk-duck {Cairina 
“ moschata) ; and where these fights have occurred the 
“ river is covered for some distance with feathers.” ® 
Birds which seem ill-adapted for fighting engage in 
fierce conflicts ; thus the stronger males of the pelican 
drive away the weaker ones, snapping with their huge 
beaks and giving heavy blows with their wings. Male 
snipe fight together, “ tugging and pushing each other 
“ with their bills in the most curious manner imagin- 
“ able.” Some few birds are believed never to fight ; 
this 'is the case, according to Audubon, with one of 
the woodpeckers of the United States (Ficu sauratus)^ 
although “ the hens are followed by even half a dozen 
“ of their gay suitors.” ^ 

The males of many birds are larger than the females, 
and this no doubt is the result of the advantage gained 
by the larger and stronger males over their rivals 
during many generations. The difference in size 
between the two sexes is carried to an extreme point 
in several Australian species; thus the male musk- 
duck (Biziura), and the male Cincloramphus cruralis 
(allied to our pipits) are by measurement actually 

’ Macgillivray, ‘ Hist. Brit. vol. xiii. 1843, p. 31. 

Birds,’ vol. iv. 1852, pp. 177- ® ‘ Ornithological Biography,’ 

181. vol. i. p. 191. For pelicans and 

* Sir E. Schomburgk, in snipes, see vol. iii. pp. 138, 477. 
‘Journal of E. Geograph. Soc.’ 


Chap. XTII. 


LAW OF BATTLE. 


555 


twice as large as tlieir respective females.^® With 
many other birds the females are larger than the 
males ; and, as formerly remarked, the explanation 
often given, namely, that the females have most of the 
work in feeding their young, will not suffice. In some 
few cases, as we shall hereafter see, the females 
apparently have acquired their greater size and 
strength for the sake of conquering other females and 
obtaining possession of the males. 

The males of many gallinaceous birds, especially of 
the polygamous kinds, are furnished with special 
weapons for fighting with their rivals, namely spurs, 
which can be used with fearful effect. It has been 
recorded by a trustworthy writer that in Derbyshire 
a kite struck at a game-hen accompanied by her 
chickens, when the cock rushed to the rescue, and 
drove his spur right through the eye and skull of the 
aggressor. The spur was with difficulty drawn from 
the skull, and as the kite, though dead, retained his 
grasp, the two birds were firmly locked together ; but 
the cock when disentangled was very little injured. 
The invincible courage of the game-cock is notorious : 
a gentleman who long ago witnessed the brutal scene, 
told me that a bird had both its legs broken by some 
accident in the cockpit, and the owner laid a wager 
that if the legs could he spliced so that the bird could 
stand upright, he would continue fighting. This was 
effected on the spot, and the bird fought with un- 
daunted courage until he received his death-stroke. In 
Ceylon a closely allied, wild species, the Gallus Stanleyiy 

Gould, ‘ Handbook of Birds ^ Mr. Hewitt in the ‘ Poultry 
of Australia,’ vol. L p. 395 ; vol. Book bv Tegetmeier,’ 1866, p. 
ii. p. 383. 137. 


556 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


is known to fight desperately “in defence of his 
“ seraglio,” so that one of the combatants is frequently 
found dead.^^ An Indian partridge {Ortygornis gularis), 
the male of which is furnished with strong and sharp 
spurs, is so quarrelsome “ that the scars of former 
“ fights disfigure the breast of almost every bird you 
kill.” 

The males of almost all gallinaceous birds, even 
those which are not furnished with spurs, engage 
during the breeding-season in fierce conflicts. The 
Capercailzie and Black-cock (Tetrao urogallus and T. 
tetrix), which are both polygamists, have regular 
appointed places, whore during many weeks they 
congregate in numbers to fight together and to display 
their charms before the females. Dr. W. Kovalevsky 
informs me that in Kussia he has seen the snow all 
bloody on the arenas where the capercailzie have 
fought ; and the black-cocks “ make the feathers fly in 
“ every direction,” when several “ engage in a battle 
“ royal.” The elder Brehm gives a curious account of 
the Balz, as the love-dances and love-songs of the 
Black-cock are called in Germany. The bird utters 
almost continuously the strangest noises : “ he holds 
“ his tail up and spreads it out like a fan, he lifts up 
“ his head and neck with all the feathers erect, and 
“ stretches his wings from the body. Then he takes a 
“ few jumps in different directions, sometimes in a 
“ circle, and presses the under part of his beak so hard 
“ against the ground that the chin feathers are rubbed 
“ off. During these movements he beats his wings and 

Lay arc], ‘Annals and Mag. Jerdon, ‘Birds of India,’ 

of Nat. Hist ' vol. xiv. 1854, p. vol. iii. p. 574. 

63 


Chap XIII. 


LAW OF BATTLE. 


557 


“ turns round and round. The more ardent he grows 
“ the more lively he becomes, until at last the bird 
“ appears like a frantic creature.” At such times the 
black-cocks are so absorbed that they become almost 
blind and deaf, hut less so than the capercailzie : hence 
bird after bird may be shot on the same spot, or even 
caught by the hand. After performing these antics 
the males begin to fight : and the same black-cock, in 
order to prove his strength over several antagonists, 
will visit in the course of one morning several Balz- 
places, which remain the same during successive 
years.^^ 

The peacock with his long train appears more like a 
dandy than a warrior, but he sometimes engages in 
fierce contests : the Kev. W. Darwin Fox informs me 
that at some little distance from Chester two peacocks 
became so excited whilst fighting, that they flew over 
the whole city, still engaged, until they alighted on 
the top of St. John’s tower. 

The spur, in those gallinaceous birds which are thus 
provided, is generally single ; but Polyplectron (see 
fig. 51, p. 98) has two or more on each leg ; and one 
of the Blood-pheasants {Ithaginis cruentus) has been 
seen with five spurs. The spurs are generally confined 
to the male, being represented by mere knobs or rudi- 
ments in the female; but the females of the Java 
peacock (Pavo muticus) and, as I am informed by Mr. 
Blyth, of the small fire-backed pheasant {Euplocamus 
erythropthalmus) possess spurs. In Galloperdix it is 
usual for the males to have two spurs, and for the 

Brehm, ‘ lUust. Thierleben,’ taken from L. Lloyd, ‘ The Game 
1867, B. iv. 8. 351. Some of Birds of Sweden,’ &c., 1867, p. 
the foregoing statements are 79. 


558 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


females to have only one on each leg.'^ Hence spurs 
may be considered as a masculine structure, which has 
been occasionally more or less transferred to the 
females. Like most other secondary sexual characters, 
the spurs are highly variable, both in number and 
development, in the same species. 

Various birds have spurs on their wings. But the 
Egyptian goose {Ghenalopex aegyptiacus) has only “ bare 
“ obtuse knobs,” and these probably shew us the first 
steps by which true spurs have been developed in 
other species. In the spur-winged goose, Plectropterus 
gambensis, the males have much larger spurs than the 
females ; and they use them, as I am informed by Mr. 
Bartlett, in fighting together, so that, in this case, the 
wing-spurs serve as sexual weapons ; but according to 
Livingstone, they are chiefly used in the defence of the 
young. The Palamedea (fig. 38) is armed with a pair 
of spurs on each wing ; and these are such formidable 
weapons that a single blow has been known to drive a 
dog howling away. But it does not appear that the 
spurs in this case, or in that of some of the spur- 
winged rails, are larger in the male than in the female.^® 
In certain plovers, however, the wing-spurs must be 
considered as a sexual character. Thus in the male ot 
our common peewit ( Vanellus cristatus) the tubercle on 
the shoulder of the wing becomes more prominent 
dnring the breeding-season, and the males fight 
together. In some species of Lobivanellus a similar 

“ Jerdon, * Birds of India : terns, ‘ Livingstone’s Travels,’ p. 

on Ithaginis, vol. iii. p. 623 ; on 254. For Palamedea, Brehm’s 
Galloperdix, p. 541. ‘ Thierleben,’ B. iv. s. 740. See 

For the Egyptian goose, see also on this bird Azara, ‘ Voyages 
Macgillivray, ‘ British Birds,’ dans I’Amerique merid.’ tom. iv, 
voL iv. p. 639. For Plectrop- 1809, pp. 179, 253. 



Chap. XIII. 


LAW OF BATTLE. 


tubercle becomes developed during the breeding- 
season ‘ into a short horny spur.” In the Australian 


Fig. 3«. Palamedea ccmut^ (from Brehm), shewing the double wing.spun», and the 
filament on the bead. 


560 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


L. lohatus both sexes have spurs, but these are much 
larger in the males than in the females. In an allied 
bird, the Hoplopterus armatus, the spurs do not increase 
in size during the breeding-season; but these birds 
have been seen in Egypt to tight together, in the same 
manner as our peewits, by turning suddenly in the air 
and striking sideways at each other, sometimes with fatal 
results. Thus also they drive away other enemies.^’ 
The season of love is that of battle ; but the males 
of some birds, as of the game-fowl and ruff, and even 
the young males of the wild turkey and grouse,^® are 
ready to fight whenever they meet. The presence of 
the female is the teierrima belli causa. The Bengali 
baboos make the pretty little males of the amadavat 
{Estrelda amandava) fight together by placing three 
small cages in a row, with a female in the middle ; 
after a little time the two males are turned loose, and 
immediately a desperate battle ensues.^® When many 
males congregate at the same appointed spot and fight 
together, as in the case of grouse and various other 
birds, they are generally attended by the females,^® 


See, on our peewit, Mr. K. 
Carr in ‘Land and Water,* Aug. 
8th, 1868, p. 46. In regard 
to Lobivanellus, see Jerdon’s 
‘ Birds of India,’ vol. iii. p. 647, 
and Gould’s ‘ Handbook of Birds 
of Australia,’ vol. ii. p. 220. 
For the Holopterus, see Mr. 
Allen in the ‘ Ibis,’ vol. v. 1863, 
p. 156. 

Audubon, ‘ Omitb. Bio- 
graphy,’ vol. ii. p. 492 ; vol. i. 
pp. 4-13. 

“ Mr. Blytb, ‘ Land and 
Water,’ 1867, p. 212. 

Richardson on Tetrao um- 


bellus ‘ Fauna Bor. Amer. ; 
Birds,’ 1831, p. 343. L. Lloyd, 
‘ Game Birds of Sweden,’ 1867, 
pp. 22, 79, on the capercailzie 
and black-cock. Brebm, how- 
ever, asserts (‘ Thierleben,’ &c., 
B. iv. 8. 352) that in Germany 
the grey-hens do not generally 
attend the Balzen of the black- 
cocks, but this is an exception 
to the common rule; possibly 
the hens may lie hidden in the 
surrounding bushes, as is known 
to be the case with the gray- 
hens in Scandinavia, and with 
other species in N. America, 


Chap. XIII. 


LAW OF BATTLE. 


561 


which afterwards pair with the victorious combatants. 
But in some cases the pairing precedes instead of 
succeeding the combat : thus according to Audubon,^' 
several males of the Virginian goat-sucker {Cajprimulgus 
virginianus) “ court, in a highly entertaining manner 
“ the female, and no sooner has she made her choice, 
‘‘ than her approved gives chase to all intruders, and 
“drives them beyond his dominions.” Generally the 
males try to drive away or kill their rivals before they 
pair. It does not, however, appear that the females 
invariably prefer the victorious males. I have indeed 
been assured by Dr. W. Kovalevsky that the female 
capercailzie sometimes steals away with a young male 
who has not dared to enter the arena with the older 
cocks, in the same manner as occasionally happens 
with the does of the red-deer in Scotland. When two 
males contend in presence of a single female, the 
victor, no doubt, commonly gains his desire ; but some 
of these battles are caused by wandering males trying 
to distract the peace of an already mated pair.^^ 

Even with the most pugnacious species it is 
probable that the pairing does not depend exclusively 
on the mere strength and courage of the male ; for 
such males are generally decorated with various 
ornaments, which often become more brilliant during 
the breeding-season, and which are sedulously dis- 
played before the females. The males also endeavour 
to charm or excite their mates by love-notes, songs, 
and antics ; and the courtship is, in many instances, a 
prolonged affair. Hence it is not probable that the 

‘ Ornithological Biography,’ iv. 1867, p. 990. Audubon, 
vol. ii. p. 275. ‘Ornith. Biography,’ toI. ii. p. 

“ Brehm, ‘ Thierleben,’ &c., B. 492. 

2 0 


562 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


females are indijfferent to the charms of the opposite 
sex, or that they are invariably compelled to yield to 
the victorious males. It is more probable that the 
females are excited, either before or after the conflict, 
by certain males, and thus unconsciously prefer them. 
In the case of Tetrao umbellus, a good observer goes 
so far as to believe that the battles of the males are 
“ all a sham, performed to show themselves to the 
“ greatest advantage before the admiring females who 
“assemble around; for I have never been able to find 
“ a maimed hero, and seldom more than a broken 
“ feather.” I shall have to recur to this subject, but I 
may here add that with the Tetrao eupido of the 
United States, about a score of males assemble at a 
particular spot, and, strutting about, make the whole 
air resound with their extraordinary noises. At the 
first answer from a female the males begin to fight 
furiously, and the weaker give way ; but then, 
according to Audubon, both the victors and vanquished 
search for the female, so that the females must either 
then exert a choice, or the battle must be renewed. 
So, again, with one of the field-starlings of the United 
States {Sturnella ludoviciana) the males engage in 
fierce conflicts, “ but at the sight of a female they all 
“ fly after her as if mad.” 

Vocal and instrumental music. — With birds the voice 
serves to express various emotions, such as distress, 
fear, anger, triumph, or mere happiness. It is ap- 
parently sometimes used to excite terror, as in the 

‘ Land and Water,’ July gv2>.\)\iy on Tetrao eupido, 
25th, 1868, p. 14. ii. p. 492 ; on the Sturnus, voL 

2* Audubon’s ‘ Ornitholog. Bio- ii. p. 219. 


Chap. XIII. 


VOCAL MUSIC 


563 


case of the hissing noise made by some nestlings-hirds. 
Audubon relates that a night-heron {Ardea nycticorax^ 
Linn.), which he kept tame, used to hide itself when a 
cat approached, and then “ suddenly start up uttering 
“ one of the most frightful cries, apparently enjoying 
“ the cat’s alarm and flight.” The common domestic 
cock clucks to the hen, and the hen to her chickens, 
when a dainty morsel is found. The hen, when she 
has laid an egg, “ repeats the same note very often, 
“ and concludes with the sixth above, which she holds 
“ for a longer time ; ” and thus she expresses her joy. 
Some social birds apparently call to each other for 
aid ; and as they flit from tree to tree, the flock is kept 
together by chirp answering chirp. During the 
nocturnal migrations of geese and other water-fowl, 
sonorous clangs from the van may be heard in the 
darkness overhead, answered by clangs in the rear. 
Certain cries serve as danger signals, which, as the 
sportsman knows to his cost, are understood by the 
same species and by others. The domestic cock crows, 
and the humming-bird chirps, in triumph over a 
defeated rival. The true song, however, of most birds 
and various strange cries are chiefly uttered during 
the breeding-season, and serve as a charm, or merely 
as a call-note, to the other sex. 

Naturalists are much divided with respect to the 
object of the singing of birds. Few more careful 
observers ever lived than Montagu, and he maintained 
that the “ males of song-birds and of many others do 
“not in general search for the female, but, on the 

^ ‘ Ornithological Biograph.,’ ton, ‘ Philosoph. Transact.’ 1773 
vol. V. p. GOI. p. 252. 

The Hon. Daincs Barring- 


564 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


“ contrary, their business in the spring is to perch on 
“some conspicuous spot, breathing out their full and 
“ amorous notes, which, by instinct, the female knows, 
“ and repairs to the spot to choose her mate.” Mr. 
Jenner Weir informs me that this is certainly the 
case with the nightingale. Bechstein, who kept birds 
during his whole life, asserts, “ that the female canary 
“ always chooses the best singer, and that in a state of 
“ nature the female finch selects that male out of a 
“ hundred whose notes please her most.” There can 
be no doubt that birds closely attend to each other’s 
song. Mr. Weir has told me of the case of a bullfinch 
which had been taught to pipe a German waltz, and 
who was so good a performer that he cost ten guineas ; 
when this bird was first introduced into a room 
where other birds were kept and he began to sing, all 
the others, consisting of about twenty linnets and 
canaries, ranged themselves on the nearest side of 
their cages, and listened with the greatest interest to 
the new performer. Many naturalists believe that the 
singing of birds is almost exclusively “ the effect of 
“ rivalry and emulation,” and not for the sake of 
charming their mates. This was the opinion of 
Daines Barrington and White of Selborne, who both 
especially attended to this subject.^® Barrington, 
however, admits that “superiority in song gives to 
“ birds an amazing ascendancy over others, as is well 
“ known to bird-catchers.” 

^ ‘ Ornithological Dictionary,’ “ rally get a mate first, when 

1833, p. 475. “ they are bred in the same 

‘ Naturgeschichte der Stu- “room.” 
benvogel,’ 1840, s. 4. Mr. PhilosophicalTransactions,’ 

Harrison Weir likewise writes 1773, p. 263. White’s ‘ Natural 
to me : — “ I am informed that History of Selborne,’ 1825, vol. 
“ the best singing males gene- i. p. 246. 


Chap. XIII. 


VOCAL MUSIC. 


565 


It is certain that there is an intense degree oi 
rivalry between the males in their singing. Bird- 
fanciers match their birds to see which will sing 
longest ; and I was told by Mr. Yarrell that a first-rate 
bird will sometimes sing till he drops down almost 
dead, or according to Bechstein,^® quite dead from 
rupturing a vessel in the lungs. Whatever the cause 
may be, male birds, as I hear from Mr. Weir, often die 
suddenly during the season of song. That the habit 
of singing is sometimes quite independent of love is 
clear, for a sterile, hybrid canary-bird has been de- 
scribed as singing whilst viewing itself in a mirror, 
and then dashing at its own image ; it likewise 
attacked with fury a female canary, when put into the 
same cage. The jealousy excited by the act of singing 
is constantly taken advantage of by bird-catchers; a 
male, in good song, is hidden and protected, whilst a 
stufied bird, surrounded by limed twigs, is exposed to 
view. In this manner, as Mr. Weir informs me, a man 
has in the course of a single day caught fifty, and in 
one instance seventy, male chaffinches. The power and 
inclination to sing differ so greatly with birds that 
although the price of an ordinary male chaffinch is 
only sixpence, Mr. Weir saw one bird for which the 
bird-catcher asked three pounds ; the test of a really 
good singer being that it will continue to sing whilst 
the cage is swung round the owner’s head. 

That male birds should sing from emulation as well 
as for charming the female, is not at all incompatible ; 
and it might have been expected that these two habits 
would have concurred, like those of display and 

‘ Naturgesch. der Stuben- Mr. Bold, ‘ Zoologist,’ 

vogel,’ 1840, 8. 252. 1843-44, p. 659. 


566 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


pugnacity. Some authors, however, argue that the 
song of the male cannot serve to charm the female, 
because the females of some few species, such as of 
the canary, robin, lark, and bullfinch, especially when 
in a state of widowhood, as Bechstein remarks, pour 
forth fairly melodious strains. In some of these cases 
the habit of singing may be in part attributed to the 
females having been highly fed and confined,^^ for this 
disturbs all the usual functions connected with the 
reproduction of the species. Many instances have 
already been given of the partial transference of 
secondary masculine characters to the female, so that 
it is not at all surprising that the females of some 
species should possess the power of song. It has also 
been argued, that the song of the male cannot serve as a 
charm, because the males of certain species, for instance 
of the robin, sing during the autumn.^^ But nothing 
is more common than for animals to take pleasure 
in practising whatever instinct they follow at other 
times for some real good. How often do we see birds 
which fly easily, gliding and sailing through the air 
obviously for pleasure ? The cat plays with the cap- 
tured mouse, and the cormorant with the captured 
fish. The weaver-bird (Ploceus), when confined in a 
cage, amuses itself by neatly weaving blades of grass 
between the wires of its cage. Birds which habitually 
fight during the breeding-season are generally ready 
to fight at all times ; and the males of the capercailzie 
sometimes hold their Balzen or leks at the usual place 

D. Barrington, ‘ Phil. with the water-ouzel, see Mr. 
Transact.’ 1773, p. 262. Bech- Hepburn in the ‘ Zoologist,’ 

stein, ‘ Stubenvogel,’ 1840, s. 4. 1845-46, p. 1068. 

^ This is likewise the case 


Chap. XIII. 


VOCAL IMUSTO. 


567 


of assemblage during the autumn.^^ Hence it is not at 
all surprising that male birds should continue singing 
for their own amusement after the season for courtship 
is over. 

As shewn in a previous chapter, singing is to a 
certain extent an art, and is much improved by- 
practice. Birds can be taught various tunes, and even 
the unmelodious sparrow has learnt to sing like a 
linnet. They acquire the song of their foster parents,®® 
and sometimes that of their neighbours.®® All the 
common songsters belong to the Order of Insessores, 
and their vocal organs are much more complex than 
those of most other birds ; yet it is a singular fact that 
some of the Insessores, such as ravens, crows, and 
magpies, possess the proper apparatus,®^ though they 
never sing, and do not naturally modulate their voices 
to any great extent. Hunter asserts ®® that with the 
true songsters the muscles of the larynx are stronger 
in the males than in the females ; but with this slight 
exception there is no difference in the vocal organs of 
the two sexes, although the males of most species sing 
so much better and more continuously than the females. 

It is remarkable that only small birds properly sing. 
The Australian genus Menura, however, must be 
excepted ; for the Menura Alberti, which is about the 
size of a half-grown turkey, not only mocks other 


“ L. Lloyd, ‘Game Birds of 
Sweden,’ 1867, p. 25. 

“ Barrington, ibid. p. 264, 
Bechstein, ibid. s. 5. 

^ Bureau de la Malle gives a 
curious instance (‘Annales des 
Sc. Nat.’ 3rd series. Zoolog. tom. 
X. p. 118) of some wild black- 
birds in his garden in Paris, 


which naturally learnt a re- 
publican air from a caged bird. 

Bishop, in ‘ Todd’s Cyclop, 
of Auat. and Phys.’ vol. iv. p. 
1496. 

As stated by Barrington in 
‘ Philosoph. Transact.’ 1773, p. 
262. 


568 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


birds, but “its own whistle is exceedingly beautiful 
“ and varied.” The males congregate and form “ cor- 
rdborying places,” where they sing, raising and spread- 
ing their tails like peacocks, and drooping their 
wings.^® It is also remarkable that birds which sing well 
are rarely decorated with brilliant colours or other orna- 
ments. Of our British birds, excepting the bullfinch 
and goldfinch, the best songsters are plain-coloured. 
The kingfisher, bee-eater, roller, hoopoe, woodpeckers, 
&c., utter harsh cries ; and the brilliant birds of the 
tropics are hardly ever songsters.^® Hence bright 
colours and the power of song seem to replace each 
other. We can perceive that if the plumage did not 
vary in brightness, or if bright colours were dangerous 
to the species, other means would be employed to charm 
the females ; and melody of voice offers one such means. 

In some birds the vocal organs differ greatly in the 
two sexes. In the Tetrao cupido (fig. 39) the male has 
two bare, orange-coloured sacks, one on each side of 
the neck; and these are largely inflated when the 
male, during the breeding-season, makes his curious 
hollow sound, audible at a great distance. Audubon 
proved that the sound was intimately connected with 
this apparatus (which reminds us of the air-sacks on 
each side of the mouth of certain male frogs), for he 
found that the sound was much diminished when one 
of the sacks of a tame bird was pricked, and when both 
were pricked it was altogether stopped. The female 
has “a somewhat similar, though smaller naked space 
“ of skin on the neck ; but this is not capable of 

Gould, ‘ Handbook to the April 1870, p. 125. 

Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. 1865, See remarks to this effect 

pp. 308-310. See also Mr. T. in Gould’s ‘ Introduction to the 
W. Wood in the ‘ Student,’ Trochilid^,’ 1861, p. 22. 


Chap. XIII. 


VOCAL MUSIC. 


569 


“ inflation.” The male of another kind of grouse 
(Tetrao urojphasianus), whilst courting the female, has 



^ * The Sportsman and Natu- 
ralist in Canada,’ by Major W. 
Koss King, 1866, pp. 144-146. 
Mr. T. W. Wood gives in the 
‘ Student ’ (April, 1870, p. 116) 
an excellent account of the at- 


titude and habits of this bird 
during its coui’tship. He states 
that the ear- tufts or neck- 
plumes are erected, so that they 
meet over the crown of the 
head. See his drawing, fig. 39, 


570 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


his “bare yellow oesophagus inflated to a prodigious 
“ size, fully half as large as the body ; ” and he then 
utters various grating, deep, hollow tones. With his 
neck-feathers erect, his wings lowered, and buzzing on 
the ground, and his long pointed tail spread out like 
a fan, he displays a variety of grotesque attitudes. 
The oesophagus of the female is not in any way 
remarkable.'*^ 

It seems now well made out that the great throat 
pouch of the European male bustard {Otis tarda), and 
of at least four other species, does not, as was formerly 
supposed, serve to hold water, but is connected with 
the utterance during the breeding-season of a peculiar 
sound resembling “ oak.”*^ A crow-like bird inhabiting 
South America {Cephalo]pterm ornatus, fig. 40) is called 
the umbrella-bird, from its immense top knot, formed 
of bare white quills surmounted by dark-blue plumes, 
which it can elevate into a great dome no less than five 
inches in diameter, covering the whole head. This 
bird has on its neck a long, thin, cylindrical fieshy 
appendage, which is thickly clothed with scale-like blue 
feathers. It probably serves in part as an ornament, 
but likewise as a resounding apparatus ; for Mr. Bates 
found that it is connected “ with an unusual develop- 
“ment of the trachea and vocal organs.” It is dilated 
when the bird utters its singularly deep, loud and long 


Richardson, ‘ Fauna Bor. 
American : Birds,’ 1831, p. 359. 
Audubon, ibid. vol. iv. p. 507. 

** The following papers have 
been lately written on this 
subject : Prof. A. Newton, in 
the ‘ Ibis,’ 1862, p. 107 ; Dr. 
Cullen, ibid. 1865, p. 145 ; Mr. 
Flower, in ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 


1865, p. 747 ; and Dr. Murie, 
in ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1868, p. 
471. In this latter paper an 
excellent figure is given of the 
male Australian Bustard in full 
display with the sack distended. 
It is a singular fact that the 
sack is not developed in all the 
males of the same species. 


VOCAL MUSIC. 


Chap. XUI. 


571 



sustained fluty note. The head-crest and neck-appen- 
dage are rudimentary in the female. 

The vocal organs of various web-footed and wading 
birds are extraordinarily complex, and differ to a certain 


Ffg. 40. Tbe Umbrella-bird or Cepbaloptertis orratus, male (from Brebm), 


extent in the two sexes. In some cases the trachea is 
convoluted, like a French horn, and is deeply embedded 


^ Bates, ‘ The Naturalist on 
the Amazons,’ 1863, vol. ii. p. 
284 ; Wallace, in ‘ Proc. Zool. 
Soc.’ 1850, p. 206. A new 


species, with a still larger neck- 
appendage ((7. penduliger)y has 
lately been discovered, see ‘ Ibis,* 
vol. i. p. 457. 


572 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


in tlie sternum. In the wild swan {Gygnus ferus) it is 
more deeply embedded in the adult male than in the 
adult female or young male. In the male Merganser 
the enlarged portion of the trachea is furnished with 
an additional pair of muscles.*® In one of the ducks, 
however, namely Anas 'punctata, the bony enlargement 
is only a little more developed in the male than in the 
female.*® But the meaning of these differences in the 
trachea of the two sexes of the Anatidse is not under- 
stood ; for the male is not always the more vociferous ; 
thus with the common duck, the male hisses, whilst the 
female utters a loud quack.*’ In both sexes of one of 
the cranes (Grus virgo) the trachea penetrates the 
sternum, but presents “ certain sexual modifications.” 
In the male of the black stork there is also a well- 
marked sexual difference in the length and curvature 
of the bronchi.*® Highly important structures have, 
therefore, in these cases been modified according to sex. 

It is often difficult to conjecture whether the many 
strange cries and notes uttered by male birds during 
the breeding-season serve as a charm or merely as a 
call to the female. The soft cooing of the turtle-dove 
and of many pigeons, it may be presumed, pleases the 
female. When the female of the wild turkey utters her 
call in the morning, the male answers by a note which 


Bishop, in Todd’s ‘ Cyclop, 
of Anat. and Phys.’ vol. iv. p. 
1499. 

Prof. Newton, ‘ Proc. Zoo- 
log. Soc.’ 1871, p. 651. 

The spoonbill (Platalea) has 
its trachea convoluted into a 
figure of eight, and yet this bird 
(Jerdon, ‘Birds of India,’ vol. 
iii. p. 763) is mute; but Mr. 
Blyth informs me that the con- 


volutions are not constantly 
present, so that perha])s they 
are now tending towards abor- 
tion. 

‘ Elements of Comp. Anat.’ 
by 11. Wagner, Eng. translat. 
1845, p. 111. With respect to 
the swan, as given above, Yar- 
rell’s ‘ Hist, of British Birds,’ 
2nd edit. 1845, voL iii. p. 193. 


Chap. XIII. 


INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC. 


573 


differs from the gobbling noise made, when with 
erected feathers, rustling wings and distended wattles, 
he puffs and struts before her.^® The s^el of the black- 
cock certainly serves as a call to the female, for it has 
been known to bring four or five females from a dis- 
tance to a male under confinement ; but as the black- 
cock continues his spel for hours during successive days, 
and in the case of the capercailzie “ with an agony of 
“ passion,” we are led to suppose that the females which 
are present are thus charmed.®® The voice of the 
common rook is known to alter during the breeding- 
season, and is therefore in some way sexual.®^ But 
what shall we say about the harsh screams of, for 
instance, some kinds of. macaws ; have these birds as 
bad taste for musical sounds as they apparently have 
for colour, judging by the inharmonious contrast of 
their bright yellow and blue plumage ? It is indeed 
possible that without any advantage being thus gained, 
the loud voices of many male birds may be the result 
of the inherited effects of the continued use of their 
vocal organs when excited by the strong passions of 
love, jealousy and rage ; but to this point we shall 
recur when we treat of quadrupeds. 

We have as yet spoken only of the voice, but the 
males of various birds practise, during their courtship, 
what may be called instrumental music. Peacocks and 
Birds of Paradise rattle their quills together. Turkey- 
cocks scrape their wings against the ground, and some 
kinds of grouse thus produce a buzzing sound. Another 

C. L. Bonaparte, quoted in of Sweden,’ &c., 1867, pp. 22, 
the ‘ Naturalist Library : Birds,’ 81. 

vol. xiv. p. 126. Jenner, * Philosoph. Trans- 

^ L. Lloyd, ‘ The Game Birds actions,’ 1824, p. 20. 


574 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


North American grouse, the Tefrao iimhellus, when with 
his tail erect, his ruffs displayed, “ he shows off his 
“finery to the females, who lie hid in the neighbourhood,” 
drums by rapidly striking his wings together above his 
back, according to Mr. K. Haymond, and not, as Audu- 
bon thought, by striking them against his sides. The 
sound thus produced is compared by some to distant 
thunder, and by others to the quick roll of a drum. 
The female never drums, “ but flies directly to the 
“ place where the male is thus engaged.” The male of 
the Kalij -pheasant, in the Himalayas/ “ often makes a 
“ singular drumming noise with his wings, not unlike 
“ the sound produced by shaking a stiff piece of cloth.” 
On the west coast of Africa the little black-weavers 
(Ploceus ? ) congregate in a small party on the hushes 
round a small open space, and sing and glide through 
the air with quivering wings, “ which make a rapid 
“ whirring sound like a child’s rattle.” One bird after 
another thus performs for hours together, but only 
during the courting-season. At this season, and at no 
other time, the males of certain night-jars (Caprimulgus) 
make a strange booming noise with their wings. The 
various species of wood-peckers strike a sonorous branch 
with their beaks, with so rapid a vibratory movement 
that “ the head appears to be in two places at once.” 
The sound thus produced is audible at a considerable 
distance, but cannot be described ; and I feel sure that 
its source would never be conjectured by any one 
hearing it for the first time. As this jarring sound is 
made chiefly during the breeding-season, it has been 
considered as a love-song; but it is perhaps more 
strictly a love-call. The female, when driven from her 
nest, has been observed thus to call her mate, who 


Ohap. XIll. 


INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC. 


575 


answered in the same manner and soon appeared. 
Lastly, the male Hoopoe ( TJjpupa epops) combines vocal 
and instrumental music ; for during the breeding-season 
this bird, as Mr. Swinhoe observed, first draws in air, 
and then taps the end of its beak perpendicularly down 
against a stone or the trunk of a tree, “ when the 
‘‘ breath being forced down the tubular bill produces 
“ the correct sound.” * If the beak is not thus struck 
against some object, the sound is quite different. Air 
is at the same time swallowed, and the oesophagus thus 
becomes much swollen ; and this probably acts as a 
resonator, not only with the hoopoe, but with pigeons 
and other birds. 

In the foregoing cases sounds are made by the aid of 
structures already present and otherwise necessary ; but 
in the following cases certain feathers have been 
specially modified for the express purpose of producing 
sounds. The drumming, bleating, neighing, or thun- 
dering noise (as expressed by different observers) 
made by the common snipe {Scolopax gallinago) must 
have surprised every one who has ever heard it. This 
bird, during the pairing-season, flies to “perhaps a 


For the foregoing facts see, 
on Birds of Paradise, Brelim, 
‘ Thierleben,’ Band iii. s. 325. 
On Grouse, Richardson, ‘ Fauna 
Bor. Americ. : Birds,’ pp. 343 and 
359; Major W. Ross King, 
‘ The Sportsman in Canada,’ 
1866, p. 156 ; Mr. Haymond, in 
Prof. Cox’s ‘Geol. Survey of 
Indiana,’ p. 227 ; Audubon, 
* American Ornitholog. Bio- 
graph.’ vol. i. p. 216. On the 
Kalij-pbeasant, Jerdon. ‘ Birds 
of India,’ vol. iii. p. 533. On 
tlio Weavers, ‘ Livingstone’s 


Expedition to the Zambesi,’ 
1865, p. 425. On Woodpeckers, 
MacgiUivray, ‘Hist, of British 
Birds,’ vol. iii. 1840, pp. 84, 88, 
89, and 95. On the Hoopoe, 
Mr. Svdnhoe, in ‘ Proc. Zoolog. 
Soc.’ June 23, 1863 and 1871, 
p. 348. On the Night-jar, 
Audubon, ibid. vol. ii. p. 255, 
and, ‘American Naturalist,’ 
1873, p. 672. The English 
Night-jar likewise makes in the 
spring a curious noise during its 
rapid flight. 


576 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past II. 


thousand feet in height,” and after zig-zagging about 
for a time descends to the earth in a curved line, with 
outspread tail and quivering pinions, and surprising 
velocity. The sound is emitted only during this rapid 
descent. No one was able to explain the cause until 
,M. Meves observed that on each side of the tail the 
outer feathers are peculiarly formed (fig. 41), having 



Fig. 41. Outer tail-feather of Scolopax gallinago (from ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1868). 

a stiff sabre-shaped shaft with the oblique barbs of 
unusual length, the outer webs being strongly bound 
together. He found that by blowing on these feathers, 
or by fastening them to a long thin stick and waving 
them rapidly through the air, he could reproduce the 



Fig. 42. Outer tail-feather of Scolopax frenata. 



Fig. 43. Outer tail-feather of Scolopax javcnsis. 


drumming noise made by the living bird. Both 
sexes are furnished with these feathers, but they 
are generally larger in the male than in the female, 
and emit a deeper note. In some species, as in 
8. frenata (fig. 42), four feathers, and in 8. javensis 
(fig. 43), no less than eight on each side of the tail are 
greatly modified. Different tones are emitted by the 
feathers of the different species when waved through 
the air; and the 8coIopax WiJsonii of the United States 


Chap. XIII. INSTKUMENTAL MUSIC. 577 


makes a switching noise whilst descending rapidly to 
the earth. 

In the male of the Chaniwpetes unicolor (a large 
gallinaceous bird of America), the first primary wing- 
feather is arched towards the tip and is much more 
attenuated than in the female. In an allied bird, the 
Penehpe nigra, i\lr. Salvin observed a male, which, 
whilst it flew downwards “ with outstretched wings, 
“ gave forth a kind of crashing rushing noise,” like the 
falling of a tree.^^ The male alone of one of the Indian 
bustards [Sypheotides auritus) 
has its primary wing-feathers ■ 

greatly acuminated ; and the 
male of an allied species is 
known to make a humming 
noise whilst courting the fe- 
male.« In a widely different 

group of birds, namely Hum- maTe‘: 

ming-birds, the males alone of 
certain kinds have either the 


shafts of their primary wing-feathers broadly dilated, 
or the webs abruptly excised towards the extremity. 
The male, for instance, of Selasphorus pilatijcercus, when 
adult, has the first primary wing-feather (fig. 44), 


thus excised. Whilst 
makes “a shrill, almost 

“ See M. Meves’ interesting 
[laper in ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1858, 
p. 199. For the habits of the 
snipe, Macgillivray, ‘ Hist. 
British Birds,’ vol. iv. p, 871. 
For the American snipe, Capt. 
Blakistou, ‘ Ibis,’ vol. v. I8b3, 
p. 131. 

Mr. Salvin, in ‘ Proc. Zool. 
Soc.’ 1867, p. 160. I am much 


ing from flower to flower he 
whistling noise but it 

indebted to this distinguished 
ornithologist for sketches of the 
feathers of the Chamiepe^es, and 
for other information. 

“ Jerdon, ‘Birds of India,' 
vol. iii. pp. 618, 621. 

^ Gould, ‘ Introduction to the 
Trochilidfe,’ 1861, p. 49. Sal- 
vin, ‘ I’roc. Zoolog. Sou’ 1867, 

p. 160. , „ 


578 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part Tl. 


flid not appear to Mr. Srlvin that the noise was 
intentionally made. 

Lastly, in several species of a sub-genus of Pipra or 
Manakin, the males, as described by Mr. Sclater, have 
their secondary wing-feathers modified in a still more 
remarkable manner. In the brilliantly-coloured P. 
deliciosa the first three secondaries are thick-stemmed 
and curved towards the body ; in the fourth and fifth 
(fig. 45, a) the change is greater ; and in the sixth 
and seventh (b,c) the shaft “ is thickened to an extraor- 
“ dinary degree, forming a solid horny lump.” The 
barbs also are greatly changed in shape, in comparison 
with the corresponding feathers {d, e, f) in the female. 
Even the bones of the wing, which support these 
singular feathers in the male, are said by Mr. Fraser to 
be much thickened. These little birds make an extra- 
ordinary noise, the first “ sharp note being not unlike 
“ the crack of a whip.” •’’’ 

The diversity of the sounds, both vocal and instru- 
mental, made by the males of many birds during the 
breeding-season, and the diversity of the means for 
producing such sounds, are highly remarkable. We 
thus gain a high idea of their importance for sexual 
purposes, and are reminded of the conclusion arrived at 
as to insects. It is not difiicult to imagine the steps 
by which the notes of a bird, primarily used as a mere 
call or for some other purpose, might have been im- 
proved into a melodious love song. In the case of the 
modified feathers, by which the drumming, whistling, 
or roaring noises are produced, we know that some 
birds during their courtship flutter, shake, or rattle 

Sclater, in ‘ Proc. Zool. vol. iv. 18G2, p. 175. Also 
Soc.’ 1850, p. 90, and in ‘Ibis,’ Salvin, in ‘ Ibis,’ I860, p. 37. 


CfJAP. XIII. VOCAL AND INSTKUMENTAL MUSIC. 579 

their nmnodified feathers together ; and if the fem.ales 
were led to select the best performers, the males which 
possessed the strongest or thickest, or most attenuated 



<£ e / 


Fir. 45. Secondary wing-featbers of Pipra deliciosa (from Mr. Sclater, in ‘Pn)c. 
Zool. Soc.' 1860). The three upper feathers, a, b, c, from the male; the three lower 
corresponding feathers, d, e,f, from tlie female, 
a and d, fifth secondary wing-feather of male and female, upper surface. 
b and c, sixth secondary, upper surface, c and /, seventh secondary, lower surface. 

feathers, situated on any part of the body, would he the 
most successful ; and thus by slow degrees the feathers 
might be modified to almost any extent. The females, 
of course, would not notice each slight successive 


580 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


alteration in shape, but only the sounds thus produced. 
It is a curious fact that in the same class of animals, 
sounds so different as the drumming of the snipe’s tail, 
the tapping of the woodpecker’s beak, the harsh 
trumpet-like cry of certain water-fowl, the cooing of 
the turtle-dove, and the song of the nightingale, should 
all be pleasing to the females of the several species. 
But we must not judge of the tastes of distinct species 
by a uniform standard ; nor must we judge by the 
standard of man’s taste. Even with man, we should 
remember what discordant noises, the beating of tom- 
toms and the shrill notes of reeds, please the ears of 
savages. Sir S. Baker remarks,^^ that “ as the stomach 
“ of the Arab prefers the raw meat and reeking liver 
“ taken hot from the animal, so does his ear prefer his 
“ equally coarse and discordant music to all other.” 

Love- Antics and Dances . — The curious love gestures 
of some birds have already been incidentally noticed ; 
so that little need here be added. In Northern 
America large numbers of a grouse, the Tetrao phasia- 
nellus, meet every morning during the breeding-season 
on a selected level spot, and here they run round and 
round in a circle of about fifteen or twenty feet in 
diameter, so that the ground is worn quite bare, like a 
fairy-ring. In these Partridge-dances, as they are 
called by the hunters, the birds assume the strangest 
attitudes, and run round, some to the left and some to 
the right. Audubon describes the males of a heron 
{Ardea herodias) as walking about on their long legs 
with great dignity before the females, bidding defiance 
to their rivals. With one of the disgusting carrion- 
“ ‘ 'the Nile 'rributaries of Abyssinia,’ 18G7, p. 203. 


. CIIAV. Xlll. LOVE-ANTICS AND DANCES. 


581 


vultures (Gathartes jota) the same naturalist states that 
“ the gesticulations and parade of the males at the 
“ beginning of the love-season are extremely ludicrous.” 
Certain birds perform their love-antics on the wing, as 
we have seen with the black African weaver, instead of 
on the ground. During the spring our little white- 
tliroat {Sylvia cinerea) often rises a few feet or yards in 
the air above some bush, and “ flutters with a fitful and 
“fantastic motion, singing all the while, and then 
“drops to its perch.” The great English bustard 
throws himself into indescribably odd attitudes whilst 
courting the female, as has been figured by Wolf. An 
allied Indian bustard {Otis hengalensis) at such times 
“ rises perpendicularly into the air with a hurried 
“ flapping of his wings, raising his crest and puffing 
“ out the feathers of his neck and breast, and then 
“ drops to the ground ; ” he repeats this manoeuvre 
several times, at the same time humming in a peculiar 
tone. Such females as happen to be near “ obey this 
“ saltatory summons,” and when they approach he 
trails his wings and spreads his tail like a turkey- 
cock.^® 

But the most curious case is afforded by three allied 
genera of Australian birds, the famous Bower-birds, — 
no doubt the co-descendants of some ancient species 
which fir^t acquired the strange instinct of constructing 
bowers for performing their love-antics. The bowers 
(fig 4l)), which, as we shall hereafter see, are decorated 

For Tetrao pJutsianellus, 51, and vol. iii. p. 89. On the 
see Kichardson, ‘Fauna, Bor. White-throat, Macgillivray, 
America,’ p. 361, and for further ‘ Hist. British Birds,’ vol. ii. p. 
})articulars Capt. Blakiston, 354. On the Indian Bustard, 
^ Ibis,’ 1863, p. 125. For the Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India/ vol iii. 
Cathartes and Ardea, Audubon, p. 618. 

‘ Ornith. Biography,’ vol. ii. p. 





r>82 THE DESCENT OF MAN. FauI’ H. 

with feathers, shells, bones, and leaves, are built on 


the ground for the sole purpose of courtship, for their 
nests are formed in trees. Both sexes assist in the 


Fig, 46. Bowei-bird, Clilamjde}axDaculata. with bower Cfrom Brehml 


Chap. Xlll. 


DKCOlfA'l'lON 


583 


erection of tbe bowers, but the male is the principal 
workman. So strong is this instinct that it is practised 
under continement, and Mr. Strange has described®*^ 
the habits of some Satin Bower-birds which he kept in 
an aviary in New South Wales. “ At times the male 
“ will chase the female all over the aviary, then go to 
“ the bower, pick up a gay feather or a large leaf, 
“ utter a curious kind of note, set all his feathers erect, 
“ run round the bower and become so excited that his 
“ eyes appear ready to start from his head ; he con- 
“ tinues opening first one wing then the other, uttering 
“ a low, whistling note, and, like the domestic cock, 
seems to be picking up something from the ground, 
“ until at last the female goes gently towards him.” 
Captain Stokes has described the habits and “ play- 
houses ” of another species, the 'Great Bower-bird, 
which was seen “amusing itself by flying backwards 
“ and forwards, taking a shell alternately from each 
“ side, and cai lying it through the archway in its 
“ mouth.” These curious structures, formed solely as 
halls of assemblage, where both sexes amuse themselves 
and pay their court, must cost the birds much labour. 
The bower, for instance, of the Fawn-breasted species, 
is nearly four feet in length, eighteen inches in height, 
and is raised on a thick platform of sticks. 

Dacoration.-l will first discuss the cases in which 
the males are ornamented either exclusively or in a 
much higher degree than the femules, and in a suc- 
seeding chapter those in which both sexes are equally 

Gould, ‘ liaudbook to the the Salij Bower-bird may be 
Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. pp. seen in the Zoological Society’s 
444, 449, 455. The bower of Gardens, Uegent’s Bark. 


584 


thp: descent of i\ian. 


Part II. 


ornamented, and finally the rare cases in which the 
female is somewhat more brightly-colonred than the 
male. As with the artificial ornaments used by savage 
and civilised men, so with the natural ornaments of 
birds, the head is the chief seat of decoration.®^ The 
ornaments, as mentioned at the commencement of this 
chapter, are wonderfully diversified. The plumes on 
the front or back of the head consist of variously-shaped 
feathers, sometimes capable of erection or expansion, 
by which their beautiful colours are fully displayed. 
Elegant ear-tufts (see fig. 39, ante) are occasionally 
present. The head is sometimes covered with velvety 
down, as with the pheasant ; or is naked and vividly 
coloured. The throat, also, is sometimes ornamented 
with a beard, wattles, or caruncles. Such appendages 
are generally brightly- coloured, and no doubt servo as 
ornaments, though not always ornamental in our eyes ; 
for whilst the male is in the act of courting the female, 
they often swell and assume vivid tints, as in the male 
turkey. At such times the fleshy appendages about 
the head of the male Tragopan pheasant [C<^riornis 
Temmmchii) swell into a large lappet on the throat 
and into two horns, one on each side of the splendid 
top-knot ; and these are then coloured of the most 
intense blue which I have ever beheld.®^ The African 
hornbill (Bucorax abyssinicus) inflates the scarlet 
bladder-like wattle on its neck, and witli its wings 
drooping and tail expanded “m.akes quite a grand 
“ appearance.”®^ Even the iris of the eye is sometimes 

See veiuarks to this effect, See Dr. Murie’s account 

ou the ‘ Feeling of Beauty among with coloured figures in ‘ Proc. 
Animals,’ by Mr. J. Shaw, in Zoolog. S"C.’ 1872, p. 730. 
the ‘ Athenseum,’ Nov. 24th, Mr. Monteiro, ‘ Ibis,’ vol. iv 

1866, p. 681. 1862, p. 339. 


Chap. XIII. 


DECORATION. 


585 


more brightly-coloured in the male than in the female ; 
and this is frequently the case with the beak, for 
instance, in our common blackbird. In Buceros 
corrugatiis, the whole beak and immense casque are 
coloured more conspicuously in the male than in the 
female ; and the oblique grooves upon the sides of 
“the lower mandible are peculiar to the male sex.”®^ 
The head, again, often supports fleshy appendages, 
filaments, and solid protuberances. These, if not 
common to both sexes, are always confined to the 
males. The solid protuberances have been described 
in detail by Dr. W. Marshall,®® who shews that they 
are formed either of cancellated bone coated with skin, 
or of dermal and other tissues. With mammals true 
horns are always supported on the frontal bones, but 
with birds various bones have been modified for this 
purpose ; and in species of the same group the pro- 
tuberances may have cores of bone, or be quite destitute 
of them, with intermediate gradations connecting these 
two extremes. Hence, as Dr. Marshall justly remarks, 
variations of the most different kinds have served for 
the development through sexual selection of these 
ornamental appendages. Elongated feathers or plumes 
spring from almost every part of the body. The 
feathers on the throat and breast are sometimes de- 
veloped into beautiful ruffs and collars. The tail- 
feathers are frequently increased in length ; as we see 
in the tail-coverts of the peacock, and in the tail itself 
of the Argus pheasant. With the peacock even the 
bones of the tail have been modified to support the 

®‘‘ ‘ Land and Water,’ 1868, p. &c., ‘ Kiedt-rlandisclien Archiv 
217. fiir Zoologie,’ B. 1. Heft 2. 

“ ‘ Ueber die Schiidelhocker,’ 1872. 


586 


THK DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt TI. 


heavy tail-coverts.*^*^ Tlie body of the Ar^us is not 
larger than that of a fowl ; yet the length from the 
end of the beak to the extremity of the tail is no less 
than five feet three inches,®’ and that of the beautifully 
ocellated secondary wing-feathers nearly three feet. 
In a small African night-jar (Gosmetornis vexillarius) 
due of the primary wing-feathers, during the breeding- 
season, attains a length of twenty-six inches, whilst 
the bird itself is only ten inches in length. In another 
closely-allied genus of night-jars, the shafts of the 
elongated wing-feathers are naked, except at the 
extremity, where there is a disc.®® Again, in another 
genus of night-jars, the tail-feathers are even still 
more prodigiously developed. In general the feathers 
of the tail are more often elongated than those of the 
wings, as any great elongation of the latter impedes 
flight. We thus see that in closely-allied birds orna- 
ments of the same kind have been gained by the 
males through the development of widely different 
feathers. 

It is a curious fact that the feathers of species 
belonging to very distinct groups have been modified 
in almost exactly the same peculiar manner. Thus 
the wing-feathers in one of the above-mentioned night- 
jars are bare along the shaft, and terminate in a dies ; 
or are,. as they are sometimes called, spoon or racket- 
shaped. Feathers of this kind occur in the tail of a 
mot mot (Eumomota sitperciliaris), of a king-fisher, 
finch, humming-bird, parrot, several Indian drongos 

«« Dr. W. Mar.shall, ‘ Uber Sclater, iu the ‘ Ibis,’ vol. 

dcii Vogclschwanz,’ ibid. 1>. I. vi. glBGI, p. ^ 1 i Livingstone, 
Heft 2, 1872. ‘Expedition to tiie Zambesi,’ 

Jardine’s ‘ Naturalist Li- 1865, j). 66, 
brary : Birds.’ vol. xiv. p. 166. 


ClIAl'. Xlll. 


DECORATION. 


587 


(Dicrurus and Eclolius, in one of wliicli the disc stands 
vertically), and in the tail of certain birds of paradise. 
In these latter birds, similar feathers, beautifully 
ocellated, ornament the head, as is likewise the case 
with some gallinaceous birds. In an Indian bustard 
(Sypheotides auritus) the feathers forming the ear-tufts, 
which are about four inches in length, also terminate 
in discs.®® It is a most singular fact that the motmots, 
as Mr. Salvin has clearly shewn,’® give to their tail 
feathers the racket-shape by biting off the barbs, and, 
further, that this continued mutilation has produced a 
certain amount of inherited effect. 

Again, the barbs of the feathers in various widely- 
distinct birds are filamentous or plumose, as with some 
herons, ibises, birds of paradise, and Gallinacem. In 
other cases the barbs disappear, leaving the shafts 
bare from end to end ; and these in the tail of the 
P aradisea apoda Sittdim a length of thirty-four inches 
in P. Papuana (fig. 47) they are much shorter and 
thin. Smaller feathers when thus denuded appear like 
bristles, as on the breast of the turkey-cock. As any 
fleeting fashion in dress comes to be admired by man, 
BO with birds a change of almost any kind in the 
structure or colouring of the feathers in the male 
appears to have been admired by the female. The 
fact of the feathers in widely distinct groups having 
been modified in an analogous manner no doubt 
depends primarily on all the feathers having nearly 
the same structure and manner of development, and 

Jenlon, ‘ Birds of India,’ Mng. of Nat. Hist.,’ vol. xx. 
vol. iii. p. 620. 1857, p. 416, and in Ms ‘ Malay 

‘Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1873, Archipelago,’ vol. ii. 1869, p 
p. 429. 390. 

Wallace, in ‘ Annais and 


588 


THE DESCENT OF :MAN. 


Part 1 1 



consequently tending to vary in the same manner 


Fig. 41. Paradisea I’apuana ('I'. \V. Wood^ 

W'e often see a tendency to analogous variability in 
the plumage of our domestic breeds belonging to 


Chap. XHI. 


DECORATION. 


589 


distinct species. Thus top-knots have appeared in 
several species. In an extinct variety of the turkey, 
the top-knot consisted of bare quills surmounted with 
plumes of down, so that they somewhat resembled the « 
racket-shaped feathers above described. In certain 
breeds of the pigeon and fowl the feathers are plumose, 
with some tendency in the shafts to be naked. In the 
Sebastopol goose the scapular feathers are greatly 
elongated, curled, or even spirally twisted, with the 
margins plumose. 

In regard to colour, hardly anything need here be 
said, for every one knows how splendid are the tints of 
many birds, and how harmoniously they are combined. 
The colours are often metallic and iridescent. Circular 
spots are sometimes surrounded by one or more 
differently shaded zones, and are thus converted into 
ocelli. Nor need much be said on the wonderful 
difference between the sexes of many birds. The 
common peacock offers a striking instance. Female 
birds of paradise are obscurely coloured and destitute 
of all ornaments, whilst the males are probably the 
most highly decorated of all birds, and in so many 
different ways that they must be seen to be appreciated. 
The elongated and golden-orange plumes which spring 
from beneath the wings of the Paradisea apoda^ when 
vertically erected and made to vibrate, are described 
as forming a sort of halo, in the centre of which the 
head “looks like a little emerald sun with its rays 
“formed by the two plumes. In another most 
beautiful species the head is bald, “and of a rich 

See my work on ‘ The Quoted from M. de Lafres- 

Variation of Animals and Plants naye in ‘Annals and Mag. of 
under Domestication,’ vol. i. pp. Nat. Hist.’ vol. xiii. 1854, p. 
‘<289, 293. 157 ; see also Mr. Wallace's 


590 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part PL 


cobalt blue, crossed by several lines of black velvety 
“ feathers.” 



Fig, 48. Lophornis ornatn®, male and female (from Brehm). 

^•luNs:,z . 


much fuller account in vol. xx. Wallace, ‘ The Malay Archi- 

1857, p. 412, and in his ‘ Malay pelago,’ vol. ii 1869, p. 405. 
Archipelago.’ 



Chap. XIII. DECORATION. 591 

Male humming-birds (figs. 48 and 49) almost vie 


Fig. 49. Spalhura underwoodi, male and female (from Brebm), 

witli birds of paradise in their beauty, as every one 
will admit who has seen Mr. Gould’s splendid volumes, 


592 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


or his rich collection. It is very remarkable in how 
many different ways these birds are ornamented. 
Almost every part of their plumage has been taken 
advantage of, and modified ; and the modifications 
have been carried, as Mr. Gould shewed me, to a 
wonderful extreme in some species belonging to nearly 
every sub-group. Such cases are curiously like those 
which we see in our fancy breeds, reared by man for 
the sake of ornament ; certain individuals originally 
varied in one character, and other individuals of the 
same species in other characters ; and these have been 
seized on by man and much augmented — as shewn by 
the tail of the fantail-pigeon, the hood of the jacobin, 
the beak and wattle of the carrier, and so forth. The 
sole difference between these cases is that in the one, 
the result is due to man’s selection, whilst in the other, 
as with humming-birds, birds of paradise, &c., it is 
due to the selection by the females of the more 
beautiful males. 

I will mention only one other bird, remarkable from 
the extreme contrast in colour between the sexes, 
namely the famous bell-bird {Ghasmorhynchus niveus) 
of S. America, the note of which can be distinguished 
at the distance of nearly three miles, and astonishes 
every one when first hearing it. The male is pure 
white, whilst the female is dusky-green ; and white is 
a very rare colour in terrestrial species of moderate 
size and inoffensive habits. The male, also, as 
described by Waterton, has a spiral tube, nearly three 
inches in length, which rises from the base of the 
beak. It is jet-black, dotted over with minute downy 
feathers. This tube can be infiated with air, through 
a communication with the palate ; and when not 


Chap. XIII. 


DECORATION. 


593 


inflated hangs down on one side. The genus consists 
of four species, the males of which are very distinct, 
whilst the females, as described by Mr. Sclater in a 
very interesting paper, closely resemble each other, 
thus ofiering an excellent instance of the common rule 
that within the same group the males differ much 
more from each other than do the females. In a 
second species ((7. nudicollis) the male is likewise 
snow-white, with the exception of a large space of 
naked skin on the throat and round the eyes, which 
during the breeding-season is of a fine green colour. 
In a third species (G. tricarunculatas) the head and 
neck alone of the male are white, the rest of the body 
being chestnut-brown, and the male of this species is 
provided with three filamentous projections half as 
long as the body — one rising from the base of the 
beak, and the two others from the corners of the 
mouth. 

The coloured plumage and certain other ornaments 
of the adult males are either retained for life, or are 
periodically renewed during the summer and breeding- 
season. At this same season the beak and naked skin 
about the head frequently change colour, as with some 
herons, ibises, gulls, one of the bell-birds just noticed, 
&c. In the white ibis, the cheeks, the inflatable skin 
of the throat, and the basal portion of the beak then 
become crimson.'^® In one of the rails, Gallic rex 
cridatus, a large red caruncle is developed during this 
period on the head of the male. So it is with a thin 
horny crest on the beak of one of the pelicans. 

Mr. Sclater, ‘ Intellectual paper, with a plate, in the ‘ Ibis,’ 
Observer,’ Jan. 1867. ‘ Water- 1865, p. 90. 

ton’s Wanderings,’ p. 118. See ’^‘^‘Land and Water,’ 1867, p 
also Mr. Salvin’s interesting 394. 

2 (.,» 


594 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


P. erythrorhynchus ; for, after the breeding-season, 
these horny cre.sts are shed, like horns from the heads 
of stags, and the shore of an island in a lake in Nevada 
was found covered with these curious exuviae. 

Changes of colour in the plumage according to the 
season depend, firstly on a double annual moult, 
secondly on an actual change of colour in the feathers 
themselves, and thirdly on their dull-coloured margins 
being periodically shed, or on these three processes 
more or less combined. The shedding of the deciduary 
margins may be compared with the shedding of their 
down by very young birds ; for the down in most cases 
arises from the summits of the first true feathers. 

With respect to the birds which annually undergo 
a double moult, there are, firstly, some kinds, for 
instance snipes, swallow-plovers (Glareolae), and 
curlews, in which the two sexes resemble each other, 
and do not change colour at any season. I do not 
know whether the winter plumage is thicker and 
warmer than the summer plumage, but warmth seems 
the most probable end attained of a double moult, 
where there is no change of colour. Secondly, there 
are birds, for instance, certain species of Totanus- and 
other Grallatores, the sexes of which resemble each 
other, but in which the summer and winter plumage 
differ slightly in colour. The diflerence, however, in 
these cases is so small that it can hardly be an 
advantage to them ; and it may, perhaps, be attributed 
to the direct action of the different conditions to 
which the birds are exposed during the two seasons. 

” Mr. D. G. Elliot, in ‘ Free. edited hy P. L. Sclater. Kay 
Zool. Soc.’ 1869, p. 589. Soc. 1867, p. 14. 

Nitzseb’s ‘ Fterylograpliy,’ 


CuAr. XIII. 


DOUBLE ANNUAL MOULT. 


595 


Thirdly, there are many other birds the sexes of 
which are alike, but which are widely different in 
their summer and winter plumage. Fourthly, there 
are birds the sexes of which differ from each other in 
colour ; but the females, though moulting twice, retain 
the same colours throughout the year, whilst the males 
undergo a change of colour, sometimes a great one, 
as with certain bustards. Fifthly and lastly, there 
are birds the sexes of which differ from each other in 
both their summer and winter plumage ; but the 
male undergoes greater amount of change at each 
recurrent season than the female — of which the ruff 
( Machetes pugnax) offers a good instance. 

With respect to the cause or purpose of the 
differences in colour between the summer and winter 
plumage, this may in some instances, as with the 
ptarmigan,’® serve during both seasons as a pro- 
tection. When the difference between the two 
plumages is slight it may perhaps be attributed, as 
already remarked, to the direct action of the conditions 
of life. But with many birds there can hardly be a 
doubt that the summer plumage is ornamental, even 
when both sexes are alike. We may conclude that 
this is the case with many herons, egrets, &c., for they 
acquire their beautiful plumes only during the 
breeding-season. Moreover, such plumes, top-knots, 
i\jc., though possessed by both sexes, are occasionally a 
little more developed in the male than in the female; 

The brown mottled summer is known to sutler greatly from 
plumage of the ptarmigan is of birds of prey, before it has ac- 
as much importance to it, as a quired its summer di*ess : sec 
j'rotection, as the white winter Wilhelm von Wright, in Lloyd, 
plumage ; for in Scandinavia ‘ Game Birds of Sweden,’ 1867, 
during the spring, when the p. 125. 
snow has disappeared, this bird 


596 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


and they resemble the plumes and ornaments possessed 
by the males alone of other birds. It is also known 
that confinement, by affecting the reproductive system 
of male birds, frequently checks the development of 
their secondary sexual characters, but has no immediate 
influence on any other characters ; and I am informed 
by Mr. Bartlett that eight or nine specimens of the 
Knot {Tringa canutus) retained their unadorned winter 
plumage in the Zoological Gardens throughout the 
year, from which fact we may infer that the summer 
plumage, though common to both sexes, partakes of the 
nature of the exclusively masculine plumage of many 
other birds.^° 

From the foregoing facts, more especially from 
neither sex of certain birds changing colour during 
either annual moult, or changing so slightly that the 
change can hardly be of any service to tbem, and from 
the females of other species moulting twice yet re- 
taining the same colours throughout the year, we may 
conclude that the habit of annually moulting twice has 
not been acquired in order that the male should assume 
an ornamental character during the breeding-season ; 
but that the double moult, having been origiually 
acquired for some distinct purpose, has subsequently 
been taken advantage of in certain cases for gaining a 
nuptial plumage. 

It appears at first sight a surprising circumstance 
that some closely-allied species should regularly under- 

In regard to the previous pp. G15, 630, 683 ; on Totanus, 
statements on moulting, see, on ibid. p. 700; on the plumes of 
snipes, &c., Macgidivray, ‘Hist. herons, ibid. p. 738, and Mac- 
Brit. Birds,’ vol. iv. p. 371; on gillivray, vol. iv. pp. 435 and 
Glareolse, curlews, and bustards, 444, and Mr. Stafford Allen, in 
Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ vol. iii. the ‘Ibis,’ vol. v. 1863, p. 33. 


Chap. XHI. 


DOUBLE ANNUAL MOULT. 


597 


go a double annual moult, and others only a single 
one. The ptarmigan, for instance, moults twice or 
even thrice in the year, and the blackcock only once : 
some of the splendidly coloured honey-suckers (Nec- 
tariniae) of India and some sub genera of obscurely 
coloured pipits (Anthus) have a double, whilst others 
have only a single annual moult. But the gradations 
in the manner of moulting, which are known to occur 
with various birds, shew us how species, or whole 
groups, might have originally acquired their double 
annual moult, or having once gained the habit, have 
again lost it. With certain bustards and plovers the 
vernal moult is far from complete, some feathers being 
renewed, and some changed in colour. There is also 
reason to believe that with certain bustards and rail- 
like birds, which properly undergo a double moult, 
some of the older males retain their nuptial plumage 
throughout the year. A few highly modified feathers 
may merely be added during the spring to the plumage, 
as occurs with the disc-formed tail-feathers of certain 
drongos (Bhringa) in India, and with the elongated 
feathers on the back, neck, and crest of certain herons. 
By such steps as these, the vernal moult might be 
rendered more and more complete, until a perfect 
double moult was acquired. Some of the birds of 
paradise retain their nuptial feathers throughout the 
year, and thus have only a single moiilt ; others cast 
them directly after the breeding-season, and thus have 
a double moult ; and others again cast them at this 
season during the first year, but not afterwards; so 

On the moult ingr of the vol. i. pp. 359, 365, 369. On 
ptarmigan, see Gould’s ‘Birds the moulting of Anthus, see 
of Great Britain.’ On the honey- Blyth, in ‘ Ibis,’ 1867, p. 32. 
suckers, Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ 


598 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


that these latter species are intermediate in their 
manner of moulting. There is also a great difference 
with many birds in the length of time during which 
the two annual plumages are retained ; so that the one 
- might come to be retained for the whole year, and the 
other completely lost. Thus in the spring Machetes 
pugnax retains his ruff for barely two months. In 
Natal the male widow-bird (Ghera progne) acquires his 
fine plumage and long tail-feathers in December or 
January, and loses them in March; so that they are 
retained only for about three months. Most species, 
which undergo a double moult, keep their ornamental 
feathers for about six months. The male, however, of 
the wild Gallus bankiva retains his neck-hackles for 
nine or ten months ; and when these are cast off, the 
underlying black feathers on the neck are fully exposed 
to view. But with the domesticated descendant of this 
species, the neck-hackles of the male are immediately 
replaced by new ones ; so that we here see, as to part 
of the plumage, a double moult changed under domes- 
tication into a single moult.®^ 

The common drake (Anas hoschas), after the breeding- 
season, is well known to lose his male plumage for a 
period of three months, during which time he assumes 


For the foregoing state- 
ments in regard to partial 
moults, and on old males re- 
taining their nuptial plumage, 
see Jerdon, on bustards and 
plovers, in ‘ Birds of India,’ vol. 
iii. pp. 617, 637, 709, 711. Also 
Blyth in ‘Land and Water,’ 
1867, p. 84. On the moulting 
of Paradisea, see an interesting 
article by Dr. W. Marshall, 
‘Archives Neerlandaises,’ tom. 


vi. 1871. On the Vidua, ‘ Ibis,’ 
vol. iii. 1861, p. 133. On the 
Drongo-shrikes, Jerdon, ibid, 
vol. i. p. 435, On the vernal 
moult of the Herodias biibulcus, 
Mr. S. S. Allen, in ‘ Ibis,’ 1863, 
1 >. 33. On Q alius bankiva ^ 
Blyth, in ‘Annals and Mag. of 
Nat. Hist.’ vol. i. 1848, p. 455 ; 
see, also, on this subject, my 
‘ Variation of Animals under 
Domestication,’ vol. i. p. 236. 


/ 


Chap. Xlll. 


DOUBLK ANNUAL MOUT>T. 


599 


that of the female. The male pin-tail duck {A)ias 
acuta) loses his plumage for the shorter period of six 
weeks or two months ; and Montagu remarks that 
“ this double moult within so short a time is a most 
“ extraordinary circumstance, that seems to hid defiance 
“ to all human reasoning.” But the believer in the 
gradual modification of species will he far from feeling 
surprise at finding gradations of all kinds. If the male 
pin-tail were to acquire his new plumage within a still 
shorter period, the new male feathers would almost 
necessarily he mingled with the old, and both with 
some proper to the female ; and this apparently is the 
case with the male of a not distantly-allied bird, 
namely the Merganser serrator^ for the males are said 
to “ undergo a change of plumage, which assimilates 
them in some measure to the female.” By a little 
further acceleration in the process, the double moult 
would be completely lost.®^ 

Some male birds, as before stated, become more 
brightly coloured in the spring, not by a vernal moult, 
but either by an actual change of colour in the 
feathers, or by their obscurely-coloured deciduary 
margins being shed. Changes of colour thus caused 
may last for a longer or shorter time. In the Pelecanus 
onocrotahs a beautiful rosy tint, with lemon-coloured 
marks on the breast, overspreads the whole plumage in 
the spring ; but these tints, as Mr. Sclater states, “ do 
“ not last long, disappearing generally in about six 
“ weeks or two months after they have been attained.” 
Certain finches shed the margins of their feathers in 

^ See Macgillivray, ‘ Hist. from Waterton and Montagu. 

British Birds’ (vol. v. pp. 34, Also Yarrell, ‘Hist of British 

70, and 223), on the moulting Birds,’ vol. iii. p. 243. 
of the Anatidse, with quotations 


(500 


THE DESCENT OF ^lAN. 


Part TI 


the spring, and then become brighter colonred, while 
other finches undergo no such change. Thus the 
Fringilla tristis of the United States (as well as many 
other American species) exhibits its bright colours only 
when the winter is past, whilst our goldfinch, which 
exactly represents this bird in habits, and our siskin, 
which represents it still more closely in structure, 
undergo no such annual change. But a difference of 
this kind in the plumage of allied species is not 
surprising, for with the common linnet, which belongs 
to the same family, the crimson forehead and breast 
are displayed only during the summer in England, 
whilst in Madeira these colours are retained through- 
out the year.®^ 

Display hj Male Birds of their Blumage . — Ornaments 
of all kinds, whether permanently or temporarily 
gained, are sedulously displayed by the males, and 
apparently serve to excite, attract, or fascinate the 
females. But the males will sometimes display their 
ornaments, when not in the presence of the females, as 
occasionally occurs with grouse at their balz- places, 
and as may be noticed with the peacock ; this latter 
bird, however, evidently wishes for a spectator of some 
kind, and, as I have often seen, will show off his finery 
before poultry, or even pigs.®^ All naturalists who 
have closely attended to the habits of birds, whether 
in a state of nature or under confinement, are unani- 

On the pelican, see Sclater, cannahina of Madeira, Mr. K 
in ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1868, p. Vernon Harcourt, ‘Ibis,’ vol. v. 
265. On the American finches, 1863, p. 230. 
see Audubon, ‘ Ornith. Bio- See also ‘ Ornamental 

graphy,’ vol. i. pp. 174, 221, Poultry,’ by Rev. E. S. Dixon, 
and Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ vol. 1848, p. 8. 
ii. p. 383. On the Fringilla 


CnAP. XTTI. 


DISPLAY BY THE MALE. 


601 


mously of opinion that the males take delight in 
displaying their beauty. Audubon frequently speaks 
of the male as endeavouring in various ways to charm 
the female. Mr. Gould, after describing some pecu- 
liarities in a male humming-bird, says he has no doubt 
that it has the power of displaying them to the greatest 
advantage before the female. Dr. Jerdon insists 
that the beautiful plumage of the male serves “ to 
fascinate and attract the female.” Mr. Bartlett, at the 
Zoological Gardens, expressed himself to me in the 
strongest terms to the same effect. 

It must be a grand sight in the forests of India “ to 
“ come suddenly on twenty or thirty pea-fowl, the 
“ males displaying their gorgeous trains, and strutting 
‘‘ about in all the pomp of pride before the gratified 
‘‘ females.” The wild turkey-cock erects his glittering 
plumage, expands his finely-zoned tail and barred 
wing feathers, and altogether, witb his crimson and 
blue wattles, makes a superb, though, to our eyes, 
grotesque appearance. Similar facts have already been 
given with respect to grouse of various kinds. Turning 
to another Order. The male Piuincola erocea (fig. 50) 
is one of the most beautiful birds in the world, being 
of a splendid orange, with some of the feathers curi- 
ously truncated and plumose. The female is brownish- 
green, shaded with red, and has a much smaller crest. 
Sir B. Schomburgk has described their courtship ; he 
found one of their meeting-places where ten males and 
two females were present. The space was from four 
to five feet in diameter, and appeared to have been 

^ ‘ Birds of India,’ introduct. ‘introduction to the Trochi- 
Yol. i. p. xxiv. ; on the peacock, lida),’ 18G1, pp. 15 and 111. 
vol. iii. p. 507. See Gould’s 


602 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt ir. 



“ now strutting about with a hopping gait until tired, 
“ when it gabbled some kind of note, and was relieved 
“ by another. Thus three of them successively took 
“the field, and then, with self-approbation, withdrew 
“ to rest ” The Indians, in order to obtain their skins, 


cleared of every blade of grass and smoothed as if by 
human hands. A male “ was capering, to the apparent 
“ delight of several others. Now spreading its wings, 
“ throwing up its head, or opening its tail like a fan ; 


Fig. 50. llupicola ciotea, male (T. W . Wood). 



Chap. XITl. 


DISPLAY BY THE MAT.E. 


603 


wait at one of the meeting-places till the birds are 
eagerly engaged in dancing, and then are able to kill 
with their poisoned arrows four or five males, one after 
the other/^ With birds of paradise a dozen or more 
full-plumaged males congregate in a tree to hold a 
dancing-party, as it is called by the natives : and here 
they fly about, raise their wings, elevate their exquisite 
plumes, and make them vibrate, and the whole tree 
seems, as Mr. Wallace remarks, to be filled with waving 
plumes. When thus engaged, they become so absorbed 
that a skilful archer may shoot nearly the whole party. 
These birds, when kept in confinement in the Malay 
Archipelago, are said to take much care in keeping 
their feathers clean ; often spreading them out, ex- 
amining them, and removing every speck of dirt. One 
observer, who kept several pairs alive, did not doubt 
that the display of the male was intended to please 
the female.®^ 

The Gold and Amherst pheasants during their 
courtship not only expand and raise their splendid 
frills, but twist them, as I have myself seen, obliquely 
towards the female on whichever side she may be 
standing, obviously in order that a large surface may 
be displayed before her.®® They likewise turn their 
beautiful tails and tail-coverts a little towards the 
same side. lAIr. Bartlett has observed a male Poh^- 


‘Journal of K. Geograph. 
Sue.’ vol. X. 1840, ]). 236. 

‘ Annals and Mag, of Nat. 
Hist.’ vol. xiii. 1854, p. 157 ; 
also Wallace, ibid. vol. xx. 1857, 
p. 412, and ‘ The Malay Archi- 
pelago,’ vol. ii. 1869, p. 252. 
Also T)r. Bennett, as quoted by 
Brehni, ‘ 'Thierleben,’ B. iii. s. 


326. 

Mr. T. W. Wood has given 
(‘The Student,’ April 1870, p. 
il5) a full account of this 
manner of display, by the Gold 
pheasant and by the Japanese 
pheasant, Fh. versicolor ; and 
he calls it the lateral or one- 
sided display. 



604 THK descent of man. Part II. 

plectron (fig. 51) in the act of courtship, and has shown 


Fig. 51. Polyplectron chinquis, male (T. W. Wood). 

me a specimen stuffed in the attitude then assumed. 


CiiAr. XIII. 


DISPLAY BY THE MALE. 


605 


The tail and wing-feathers of this bird are ornamented 
with beautiful ocelli, like those on the peacock’s train. 
Now when the peacock displays himself, he expands 
and erects his tail transversely to his body, for he 
stands in front of the female, and has to shew off, at 
the same time, his rich blue throat and breast. But 
the breast of the Polyplectron is obscurely coloured, 
and the ocelli are not confined to the tail-feathers. 
Consequently the Polyplectron does not stand in front 
of the female ; but he erects and expands his tail- 
feathers a little obliquely, lowering the expanded wing 
on the same side, and raising that on the opposite side. 
In this attitude the ocelli over the whole body are 
exposed at the same time before the eyes of the 
admiring female in one grand bespangled expanse. To 
whichever side she may turn, the expanded wings and 
the ohliquely-held tail are turned towards her. The 
male Tragopan pheasant acts in nearly the same 
manner, for he raises the feathers of the body, though 
not the wing itself, on the side which is opposite to 
the female, and which would otherwise be concealed, so 
that nearly all the beautifully spotted feathers are 
exhibited at the same time. 

The Argus pheasant affords a much more remarkable 
case. The immensely developed secondary wing- 
feathers are confined to the male ; and each is orna- 
mented with a row of from twenty to twenty-three 
ocelli, above an inch in diameter. These feathers are 
also elegantly marked with oblique stripes and rows of 
spots of a dark colour, like those on the skin of a tiger 
and leopard combined. These beautiful ornaments are 
hidden until the male shows himself off before the 
female. He then erects his tail, and expands his wing- 


606 


I'llE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt II. 


feathers into a great, almost upright, circular fan or 



Fig. 62. Side view of male Argus pbeasant, whilst displaying before the female. 
Observed and slcetclied from nature by Mr. T. W. Wood. 


shield, which is carried in front of the body. The neck 


Chap. XIII. ^ DISPLAY BY THE MALE. 607 

and head arc held on one side, so that they are concealed 
by the fan ; but the bird in order to see the female, 
before whom he is displaying himself, sometimes pushes 
his head between two of the long wing-feathers (as 
Mr. Bartlett has seen), and then presents a grotesque 
appearance. This must be a frequent habit with the 
bird in a state of nature, for Mr. Bartlett and his son 
on examining some perfect skins sent from the East, 
found a place between two of the feathers which was 
much frayed, as if the head had here frequently been 
pushed through. Mr. Wood thinks that the male can 
also peep at the female on one side, beyond the margin 
of the fan. 

The ocelli on the wing-feathers are wonderful 
objects ; for they are so shaded that, as the Duke of 
Argyll remarks,®® they staud out like balls lying loosely 
within sockets. When I looked at the specimen in the 
British Museum, which is mounted with the wings 
expanded and trailing downwards, I W'as however 
greatly disappointed, for the ocelli appeared flat, or 
even concave. But Mr. Gould soon made the case 
clear to me, for he held the feathers erect, in the 
position in which they would naturally be displayed, 
and now, from the light shining on them from above, 
each ocellus at once resembled the ornament called a 
ball and socket. These feathers have been shown to 
several artists, and all have expressed their admiration 
at the perfect shading. It may well be asked, could 
such artistically shaded ornaments have been formed by 
means of sexual selection ? But it will be convenient to 
defer giving an answer to this question until we treat 
in the next chapter of the principle of gradation. 

‘ 'i he Eeigu of Law,’ 1867, p. 203. 


608 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pari II. 


The foregoing remarks relate to the secondary wing- 
feathers, but the primary wing-feathers, which in most 
gallinaceous birds are uniformly coloured, are in the 
Argus pheasant equally wonderful. They are of a soft 
brown tint with numerous dark spots, each of which 
consists of two or three black dots with a surrounding 
dark zone. But the chief ornament is a space parallel 
to the dark-blue shaft, which in outline forms a perfect 
second feather lying within the true feather. This 
inner part is coloured of a lighter chestnut, and is 
thickly dotted with minute white points. I have 
shown this feather to several persons, and many have 
admired it even more than the ball and socket featheis, 
and have declared that it was more like a work of art 
than of nature. Now these feathers are quite hidden, 
on all ordinary occasions, but are fully displayed, to- 
gether with the long secondary feathers, when they 
are all expanded together so as to form the great fan 
or shield. 

The case of the male Argus pheasant is eminently 
interesting, because it affords good evidence that the 
most refined beauty may serve as a sexual charm, and 
for no other purpose. We must conclude that this is 
the case, as the secondary and primary wdng-feathers 
are not at all displayed, and the ball and socket 
ornaments are not exhibited in full perfection until 
the male assumes the attitude of courtship. The 
Argus pheasant does not possess brilliant colours, so 
that his success in love appears to depend on the great 
size of his plumes, and on the elaboration of the most 
elegant patterns. Many will declare that it is utterly 
incredible that a female bird should be able to 
appreciate fine shading and exquisite patterns. It is 


Chap. XIII. 


DISPLAY BY THE MALE. 


609 


undoubtedly a marvellous fact that she should possess 
this almost human degree of taste. He who thinks 
that he can safely gauge the discrimination and taste 
of the lower animals may deny that the female Argus 
pheasant can appreciate such refined beauty ; but he 
will then be compelled to admit that the extraordinary 
attitudes assumed by the male during the act of court- 
ship, by which the wonderful beauty of his plumage is 
fully displayed, are purposeless ; and this is a conclusion 
which I for one will never admit. 

Although so many pheasants and allied gallinaceous 
birds carefully display their plumage before the 
females, it is remarkable, as Mr. Bartlett informs 
me, that this is not the case with the dull-coloured 
Eared and Cheer pheasants (Grossoptilon awritum 
and Phasianus wallichii ) ; so that these birds seem 
conscious that they have little beauty to display. 
Mr. Bartlett has never seen the males of either of 
these species fighting together, though he has not had 
such good opportunities for observing the Cheer as the 
Eared pheasant. Mr. Genner Weir, also, finds that all 
male birds with rich or strongly-characterised plumage 
are more quarrelsome than the dull-coloured species 
belonging to the same groups. The goldfinch, for 
instance, is far more pugnacious than the linnet, and 
the blackbird than the thrush. Those birds which 
undergo a seasonal change of plumage likewise become 
much more pugnacious at the period when they are 
most gaily ornamented. No doubt the males of some 
obscurely-coloured birds fight desperately together, but 
it appears that when sexual selection has been highly 
infiuential, and has given bright colours to the males of 
any species, it has also very often given a strong 


610 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IT. 


tendency to pugnacity. We shall meet with nearly 
analogous cases when we treat of mammals. On the 
other hand, with birds the power of song and brilliant 
colours have rarely been both acquired by the males of 
the same species ; but in this case the advantage gained 
would have been the same, namely success in charming 
the female. Nevertheless it must be owned that the 
males of several brilliantly coloured birds have had 
their feathers specially modified for the sake of pro- 
ducing instrumental music, though the beauty of this 
cannot be compared, at least according to our taste, 
with that of the vocal music of many songsters. 

We will now turn to male birds which are not 
ornamented in any high degree, but which nevertheless 
display during their courtship whatever attractions 
they may possess. These cases are in some respects 
more curious than the foregoing, and have been but 
little noticed. I owe the following facts to Mr. Weir, 
who has long kept confined birds of many kinds, 
including all the British Fringillidae and Emberizidse. 
The facts have been selected from a large body of 
valuable notes kindly sent me by him. The bullfinch 
makes his advances in front of the female, and then 
pufis out his breast, so that many more of the crimson 
feathers are seen at once than otherwise would be the 
case. At the same time he twists and bows his black 
tail from side to side in a ludicrous manner. The 
male chafiinch also stands in front of the female, thus 
showing his red breast and “ blue bell,” as the fanciers 
call his head ; the wings at the same time being slightly 
expanded, with the pure white bands on the shoulders 
thus rendered conspicuous. The common linnet dis- 
tends his rosy breast, slightly expands his brown wings 


Chap. XIII. 


DISPLAY BY THE MALE. 


611 


and tail, so as to make the best of them by exhibiting 
their white edgings. We must, however, be cautious 
in concluding that the wings are spread out solely for 
display, as some birds do so whose wings are not 
beautiful. This is the case with the domestic cock, 
but it is always the wing on the side opposite to the 
female which is expanded, and at the same time scraped 
on the ground. The male goldfinch behaves differently 
from all other finches : his wings are beautiful, the 
shoulders being black, with the dark-tipped wing- 
feathers spotted with white and edged with golden 
yellow. AVhen he courts the female, he svvays his 
body from side to side, and quickly turns his slightly 
expanded wings first to one side, then to the other, 
with a golden flashing effect. Mr. Weir informs me 
that no other British finch turns thus from side to side 
during his courtship, not even the closely-allied male 
siskin, for he would not thus add to his beauty. 

Most of the British Buntings are plain coloured 
birds ; but in the spring the feathers on the head of 
the male reed-bunting {Emheriza schoeniculus) acquire 
a fine black colour by the abrasion of the dusky tips ; 
and these are erected during the act of courtship. Mr. 
Weir has kept two species of Amadina from Australia : 
the A. castanotis is a very small and chastely coloured 
finch, with a dark tail, white rump, and jet-black upper 
tail- coverts, each of the latter being marked with three 
large conspicuous oval spots of white.^^ This species, 
when courting the female, slightly spreads out and 
vibrates these parti-coloured tail-coverts in a very 
peculiar manner. The male Amadina Lathami behaves 

For the description of these the Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. 
birds, see Gould’s ‘ Handbook to 1865, p. 417. 


612 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


very differently, exhibiting before the female his 
brilliantly spotted breast, scarlet rump, and scarlet 
upper tail-coverts. I may here add from Dr. Jerdon 
that the Indian bulbul {Fycnonotus Tisemorrhous) has 
its under tail-coverts of a crimson colour, and these, 
it, might be thought, could never be well exhibited; 
but the bird ‘‘ when excited often spreads them out 
“ laterally, so that they can be seen even from above.” 
The crimson under tail-coverts of some other birds, as 
with one of the woodpeckers. Ficus major y can be seen 
without any such display. The common pigeon has 
iridescent feathers on the breast, and every one must 
have seen how the male inflates his breast whilst 
courting the female, thus showing them off to the 
best advantage. One of the beautiful bronze-winged 
pigeons of Australia (Oeyphaps lophotes) behaves, as 
described to me by Mr. Weir, very differently: the 
male, whilst standing before the female, lowers his 
head almost to the ground, spreads out and raises his 
tail, and half expands his wings. He then alternately 
and slowly raises and depresses his body, so that the 
iridescent metallic feathers are all seen at once, and 
glitter in the sun. 

Sufficient facts have now been given to shew with 
what care male birds display their various charms, and 
this they do with the utmost skill. Whilst preening 
their feathers, they have frequent opportunities for 
admiring themselves, and of studying how best to 
exhibit their beauty. But as all the males of the same 
species display themselves in exactly the same manner, 
it appears that actions, at first perhaps intentional, have 
become instinctive. If so, we ought not to accuse birds 
“ ‘ Birds of India,’ vol. ii. p. 9f) 


Chap. XIII. DISPLAY BY THE MALE. 613 

of conscious vanity ; yet when we see a peacock strutting 
about, with expanded and quivering tail-feathers, he 
seems the very emblem of pride and vanity. 

The various ornaments possessed by the males are 
certainly of the highest importance to them, for in 
some cases they have been acquired at the expense of 
greatly impeded powers of flight or of running. The 
African night-jar (Cosmetornis), which during the 
pairing-season has one of its primary wing-feathers 
developed into a streamer of very great length, is 
thereby much retarded in its flight, although at other 
times remarkable for its swiftness. The “ unwieldy size ” 
of the secondary wing-feathers of the male Argus 
pheasant is said ‘‘ almost entirely to deprive the bird 
“ of flight.” The fine plumes of male birds of paradise 
trouble them during a high wind. The extremely 
long tail-feathers of the male widow-birds (Yidua) of 
Southern Africa render ‘‘ their flight heavy ; ” but as 
soon as these are cast off they fly as well as the 
females. As birds always breed when food is abundant, 
the males probably do not suffer much inconvenience in 
searching for food from their impeded powers of move- 
ment ; but there can hardly be a doubt that they must 
be much more liable to be struck down by birds of 
prey. Nor can we doubt that the long train of the 
peacock and the long tail and wing-feathers of the 
Argus pheasant must render them an easier prey to any 
prowling tiger-cat than would otherwise be the case. 
Even the bright colours of many male birds cannot 
fail to make them conspicuous to their enemies of all 
kinds. Hence, as Mr. Gould has remarked, it probably 
is that such birds are generally of a shy disposi- 
tion, as if conscious that their beauty was a source of 


614 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 11, 


danger, and are much more difficult to discover or 
approach, than the sombre coloured and comparatively 
tame females or than the young and as yet unadorned 
males.®^ 

It is a more curious fact that the males of some birds 
which are provided with special weapons for battle, and 
which in a state of nature are so pugnacious that they 
often kill each other, suffer from possessing certain orna- 
ments. Cock-fighters trim the hackles and cut off the 
combs and gills of their cocks ; and the birds are then 
said to be dubbed. An undubbed bird, as Mr. Teget- 
meier insists, “ is at a fearful disadvantage ; the comb 
“ and gills offer an easy hold to his adversary’s beak, 
and as a cock always strikes where he holds, when 
“ once he has seized his foe, he has him entirely in his 
“ power. Even supposing that the bird is not killed, 
“ the loss of blood suffered by an undubbed cock is 
“ much greater than that sustained by one that has 
“ been trimmed.” Young turkey-cocks in fighting 
always seize hold of each other’s wattles ; and I pre- 
sume that the old birds fight in the same manner. It 
may perhaps be objected that the comb and wattles 
are not ornamental, and cannot be of service to the 
birds in this way ; but even to our eyes, the beauty of 
the glossy black Spanish cock is much enhanced by his 
white face and crimson comb; and no one who has 


On the Cosmetornis, see 
Livingstone’s ‘ Expedition to the 
Zambesi,’ 1865, p. 66. On the 
Argus pheasant, Jardine’s ‘Nat. 
Hist. Lib.: Birds,’ vol. xiv. p. 
167. On Birds of Paradise, 
Lesson, quoted by Brehm, 
‘ Thierleben,’ B. iii. s. 325. On 
the widow-bird, Barrow’s 


‘ Travels in Africa,’ vol. i. p. 
243, and ‘ Ibie,’ vol. iii. 1861, p. 
133. Mr. Gould, on the shy- 
ness of male birds, ‘Handbook 
to Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. 
1865, pp. 210, 457. 

Tegetmeier, ‘ The Poultry 
Book,’ 1866, p. 139. 


Chap. XIII. 


DISPLAY BY THE MALE. 


615 


ever seen the splendid blue wattles of the male 
Tragopan pheasant distended in courtship can for a 
moment doubt that beauty is the object gained. From 
the foregoing facts we clearly see that the plumes and 
other ornaments of the males must be of the highest 
importance to them ; and we further see that beauty 
is even sometimes more important than success in 
battle. 


616 


THE DESCENT OE MAN. 


Eart 1L 


CHAPTEK XIV. 

Birds — continued. 

Choice exerted by the female — Length of couitsbi^j — Unpaired birds 
— Mental qualities and taste for the beautiful — Preference or 
antipathy shewn by the female for particular males — Variability 
of birds — Variations sometimes abrupt — Laws of variation — 
Formation of o elli— Gradations of character — Case of Peacock, 
Argus pheasant, and Urosticte. 

When the sexes differ in beauty or in the power of 
singing, or in producing what I have called instrumental 
music, it is almost invariably the male who surpasses 
the female. These qualities, as we have just seen, are 
evidently of high importance to the male. When they 
are gained for only a part of the year it is always before 
the breeding- season. It is the male alone who elabo- 
rately displays his varied attractions, and often per- 
forms strange antics on the ground or in the air, in 
the presence of the female. Each male drives away, or 
if he can, kills his rivals. Hence we may conclude that 
it is the object of the male to induce the female to pair 
with him, and for this purpose he tries to excite or 
charm her in various ways ; and this is the opinion of 
all those who have carefully studied the habits of living 
birds. But there remains a question which has an 
all-important bearing on sexual selection, namely, does 
every male of the same species excite and attract the 
female equally ? Or does she exert a choice, and prefer 


Ohap. XIV. 


LENGTH OE COUBTSHIE. 


617 


certain males ? This latter question can be answered 
in the affirmative by much direct and indirect evidence. 
It is far more difficult to decide what qualities deter- 
mine the choice of the females ; but here again we have 
some direct and indirect evidence that it is to a large 
extent the external attractions of the male ; though no 
doubt his vigour, coufage, and other mental qualities 
come into play. We will begin with the indirect 
evidence. 

Length of Courtship . — The lengthened period during 
which both sexes of certain birds meet day after day at 
an appointed place probably depends partly on the 
courtship being a prolonged affair, and partly on 
reiteration in the act of pairing. Thus in Germany 
and Scandinavia the balzing or leks of the black-cocks 
last from the middle of March, all through April into 
May. As many as forty or fifty, or even more birds 
congregate at the leks ; and the same place is often 
frequented during successive years. The lek of the 
capercailzie lasts from the end of March to the middle 
or even end of May. In North America ‘‘ the partridge 
dances ” of the Tetrao phasianellus “ last for a month 
or more.” Other kinds of grouse, both in North 
America and Eastern Siberia,^ follow nearly the same 
habits. The fowlers discover the hillocks where the 
ruffs congregate by the grass being trampled bare, and 
this shews that the same spot is long frequented. The 
Indians of Guiana are well acquainted with the cleared 

^ Nordman describes (‘Bull. above a hundred, not counting 
Soc. Imp. des Nat. Mosccu,’ the females, which lie hid in the 
1861, tom. xxxiv. p. 264) the surrounding bushes. The noises 
balzen of Tetrao urogalloides in uttered differ from those of T. 
Amur Land. He estimated the urogallus. 

□umber of birds assembled at 


618 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


arenas, where they expect to find the beautiful cocks of 
the Eock ; and the natives of New Guinea know the 
trees where from ten to twenty male birds of paradise 
in full plumage congregate. In this latter case it is 
not expressly stated that the females meet on the same 
trees, but the hunters, if not specially asked, would 
probably not mention their presence, as their skins are 
valueless. Small parties of an African weaver (Ploeeus) 
congregate, during the breeding-season, and perform 
for hours their graceful evolutions. Large numbers of 
the Solitary snipe (Scolopax major) assemble during 
dusk in a morass ; and the same place is frequented 
for the same purpose during successive years; here 
they may be seen running about “ like so many large 
rats,” puffing out their feathers, flapping their wings, 
and uttering the strangest cries.^ 

Some of the above birds, — the black-cock, capercailzie, 
pheasant-grouse, ruff‘. Solitary snipe, and perhaps 
others, — are, as is believed, polygamists. With such 
birds it might have been thought that the stronger 
males would simply have driven away the weaker, and 
then at once have taken possession of as many females 
as possible ; but if it be indispensable for the male to 
excite or please the female, we can understand the 
length of the courtship and the congregation of so many 
individuals of both sexes at the same spot. Certain 
strictly monogamous species likewise hold nuptial 


^ With respect to the assem- 
blages of the above named grouse, 
see Brehm, ‘ Thierleben,’ B. iv. 
s. 350; also L. Lloyd, ‘Game 
Birds of Sweden,’ 1867, pp. 19, 
78. Richardson, ‘Fauna Bor. 
Americana ’ : Birds, p. 362. Re- 


ferences in regard to the assem- 
blages of other birds have already 
been given. On Paradisea, see 
WaUace, in ‘ Annals and Mag. of 
Nat. Hist.’ vol. xx. 1857, p. 412. 
On the snipe, Lloyd, ibid. p. 
221 . 


Chap. XIV. 


LENGTH OF OOURTSHEP. 


619 


assemblages ; this seems to be the case in Scandinavia 
with one of the ptarmigans, and their leks last from 
the middle of March to the middle of May. In Australia 
the lyre-bird {Menura superba) forms “small round 
hillocks,” and the M. Alberti scratches for itself shallow 
holes, or, as they are called by the natives, corroborying 
■places, where it is believed both sexes assemble. The 
meetings of the M, superba are sometimes very large : 
and an account has lately been published^ by a traveller, 
who heard in a valley beneath him, thickly covered 
with scrub, “ a din which completely astonished ” him ; 
on crawling onwards he beheld, to his amazement, about 
one hundred and fifty of the magnificent lyre-cocks, 
“ranged in order of battle, and fighting with inde- 
“ scribable fury.” The bowers of the Bower-birds are 
the resort of both sexes during the breeding-season ; and 
“ here the males meet and contend with each other for 
“ the favours of the female, and here the latter assemble 
“ and coquet with the males.” With two of the genera, 
the same hower is resorted to during many years.^ 

The common magpie {Gorvus pica, Linn.), as I have 
been informed by the Eev. W. Darwin Fox, used to 
assemble from all parts of Delamere Forest, in order to 
celebrate the “great magpie marriage.” Some years ago 
these birds abounded in extraordinary numbers, so that 
a gamekeeper killed in one morning nineteen males, 
and another killed by a single shot seven birds at roost 
together. They then had the habit of assembling very 
early in the spring at particular spots, where they could 

® Quoted by Mr. T. W. Wood Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. pp. 300, 
in the ‘ Student,’ April 1870, p. 308, 448, 451. On the ptarmi- 
125. gan, above alluded to, see Lloyd, 

Gould, ‘ Handbook to the ibid. p. 129. 


620 


tHE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 11. 


be seen in flocks, cliattering, sometimes fighting, bust- 
ling and flying about the trees. The whole affair was 
evidently considered by the birds as one of the highest 
importance. Shortly after the meeting they all sepa- 
rated, and were then observed by Mr. Fox and others 
to be paired for the season. In any district in which a 
species does not exist in large numbers, great assem- 
blages cannot, of course, be held, and the same species 
may have difi’erent habits in different countries. For 
instance, I have heard of only one instance, from Mr. 
Wedderburn, of a regular assemblage of black game in 
Scotland, yet these assemblages are so well known in 
Germany and Scandinavia that they have received 
special names. 

Unpaired Birds . — From the facts now given, we may 
conclude that the courtship of birds, belonging to widely 
different groups, is often a prolonged, delicate, and 
troublesome affair. There is even reason to suspect, 
improbable as this will at first appear, that some males 
and females of the same species, inhabiting the same 
district, do not always please each other, and con- 
sequently do not pair. Many accounts have been 
published of either the male or female of a pair having 
been shot, and quickly replaced by another. This has 
been observed more frequently with the magpie than 
with any other bird, owing perhaps to its conspicuous 
appearance and nest. The illustrious Jenner states 
that in Wiltshire one of a pair was daily shot no less 
than seven times successively, “ but all to no purpose, 
“ for the remaining magpie soon found another mate ” ; 
and the last pair reared their young. A new partner 
is generally found on the succeeding day; but Mr. 
Thompson gives the case of one being replaced on the 


Chap. XIV. 


UNPAIRED BIRDS. 


621 


evening of the same clay. Even after the eggs are 
hatched, if one of the old birds is destroyed a mate will 
often be found ; this occurred after an interval of two 
days, in a case recently observed by one of Sir J. 
Lubbock’s keepers.® The first and most obvious con- 
jecture is that male magpies must be much more 
numerous than females ; and that in the above cases, as 
well as in many others which could be given, the males 
alone had been killed. This apparently holds good in 
some instances, for the gamekeepers in Delamere Forest 
assured Mr. Fox that the magpies and carrion-crows 
which they formerly killed in succession in large 
numbers near their nests, were all males; and they 
accounted for this fact by the males being easily killed 
whilst bringing food to the sitting females. Macgil- 
livray, however, gives, on the authority of an excellent 
observer, an instance of three magpies successively killed 
on the same nest, which were all females ; and another 
case of six magpies sucessively killed whilst -sitting on 
the same eggs, which renders it probable that most of 
them were females ; though, as I hear from Mr. Fox-^ 
the male will sit on the eggs when the female is killed. 

Sir J. Lubbock’s gamekeeper has repeatedly shot, but 
how often he could not say, one of a pair of jays {Gar- 
rulus glandarius)^ and has never failed shortly after- 
wards to find the survivor re-matched. Mr. Fox, Mr. 
F. Bond, and others have shot one of a pair of carrion- 
crows {Corvus corone)y but the nest was soon again 
tenanted by a pair. These birds are rather common ; 
but the peregrine-falcon {Falco jperegrinus) is rare, yet 

® On magpies, Jenner, in ‘ Phil. i. p. 670. Thompson, in ‘ Annals 
Transact.’ 1824, p. 21. Macgil- and Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ vol. viii, 
Uvray, ‘ Hist. British Birds,’ vol. 1842, p. 494. 


622 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


Mr. Thompson states that in Ireland “ if either an old 
“ male or female be killed in the breeding-season (not an 
‘‘ uncommon circumstance), another mate is found 
‘‘within a very few days, so that the eyries, notwith- 
“ standing such casualties, are sure to turn out their 
“complement of young.” Mr. Jenner Weir has known 
the same thing with the peregrine-falcons at Beachy 
Head. The same observer informs me that three 
kestrels (Faleo tinnunculus), all males, were killed one 
after the other whilst attending the same nest; two of 
these were in mature plumage, but the third was in the 
plumage of the previous year. Even with the rare 
golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos), Mr. Birkbeck was as- 
sured by a trustworthy gamekeeper in Scotland, that if 
one is killed, another is soon found. So with the white 
owl (Strixflammea), “ the survivor readily found a mate, 
“ and the mischief went on.” 

White of Selborne, who gives the case of the owl, adds 
that he knew a man, who from believing that partridges 
when paired were disturbed by the males fighting, used 
to shoot them ; and though he had widowed the same 
female several times, she always soon found a fresh 
partner. This same naturalist ordered the sparrows, 
which deprived the house-martins of their nests, to be 
shot ; but the one which was left, “ be it cock or hen, 
“ presently procured a mate, and so for several times 
“ following.” I could add analogous cases relating to 
the chafiinch, nightingale, and redstart. With respect 
to the latter bird {FJioenicura ruticilla), a writer expresses 
much surprise how the sitting female could so soon have 
given effectual notice that she was a widow, for the 
species was not common in the neighbourhood. Mr. 
Jenner Weir has mentioned to me a nearly similar case,* 


Chap. XIV. 


UNPAIRED BIRDS. 


623 


at Blackheath he never sees or hears the note of the 
wild bullfinch, yet when one of his caged males has died, 
a wild one in the course of a few days has generally come 
and perched near the widowed female, whose call-note 
is not loud. I will give only one other fact, on the 
authority of this same observer; one of a pair of starlings 
(Sturnus vulgaris) was shot in the morning ; by noon a 
new mate was found ; this was again shot, but before 
night the pair was complete; so that the disconsolate 
widow or widower was thrice consoled during the same 
day. Mr. Engleheart also informs me that he used 
during several years to shoot one of a pair of starlings 
which built in a hole in a house at Blackheath ; but the 
loss was always immediately repaired. During one 
season he kept an account, and found that he had shot 
thirty-five birds from the same nest ; these consisted 
of both males and females, but in what proportion he 
could not say : nevertheless, after all this destruction, 
a brood was reared.® 

These facts well deserve attention. How is it that 
there are birds enough ready to replace immediately a 
lost mate of either sex ? Magpies, jays, carrion-crows, 
partridges, and some other birds, are always seen during 
the spring in pairs, and never by themselves ; and these 
offer at first sight the most perplexing cases. But birds 
of the same sex, although of course not truly paired, 
sometimes live in pairs or in small parties, as is known 
to be the case with pigeons and partridges. Birds also 

* ® On the peregrine falcon, see 139. On the Phoenicura, see 
Thompson,* Nat. Hist, of Ireland: Loudon’s ‘Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ 

Birds,’ vol. i. 1849, p. 39. On vol. vii. 1834, p. 245. Brehm 
owls, sparrows, and partridges, (‘ Tiiierleben,’ B. iv. s. 991) also 
see White, ‘Nat. Hist, of Sel- alludes to cases of birds thrice 
Iwrne,’ clit. of 1825, vol, i. p. mated during the same day. 


624 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


sometimes live in triplets, as lias been observed with 
starlings, carrion-crows, parrots, and partridges. With 
partridges two females have been known to live with one 
male, and two males with one female. In all such cases 
it is probable that the union would be easily broken ; 
and one of the three would readily pair with a widow or 
' widower. The males of certain birds may occasionally 
be heard pouring forth their love-song long after the 
proper time, shewing that they have either lost or never 
gained a mate. Death from accident or disease of one of 
a pair would leave the other free and single ; and there 
is reason to believe that female birds during the breed- 
ing-season are especially liable to premature death. 
Again, birds which have had their nests destroyed, or 
barren pairs, or retarded individuals, would easily be 
induced to desert their mates, and would probably be 
glad to take what share they could of the pleasures and 
duties of rearing offspring although not their own.’ 
Such contingencies as these probably explain most of the 
foregoing cases.® Nevertheless, it is a strange fact that 
within the same district, during the height of the breed- 


See White (‘Nat. Hist, of 
Selborne,’ 1825, vol. i. p. 140) on 
the existence, early in the season, 
of small coveys of male part- 
ridges, of which fact I have heard 
other instances. SeeJenner, on 
the retarded state of the gene- 
rative organs in certain birds, in 
‘ Phil. Transact.’ 1824. In regard 
to birds living in triplets, I owe 
to Mr. Jenner Weir the cases 
of the starlings and parrots, and 
to Mr. Fox, of partridges; on 
carrion-crows, see the ‘ Field,’ 
1868, p. 415. On various male 
birds singing after the proper 
period, see Rev. D. Jenyns, ‘ Ob- 


servations in Natural History,* 
1846, p. 87. 

* The following case has been 
given (‘The Times,’ Aug. 6th, 
1868) by the Rev. F. 0. Moriis, 
on the authority of the Hon. and 
Rev. 0. W. Forester. “The 
“gamekeeper here found a 
“hawk’s nest this year, with 
“ five young ones on it. He took 
“ lour and killed them, but l(^ft 
“one with its wing? clipped ns 
“ a decoy to destroy the old ones 
“ by. They were both shot next 
“ day, in the act of feeding the 
“ young one, and the keep r 
“ thought it was done with. Th« 


Ohap. XIV. 


MENTAL QUALITIES. 


625 


ing-season, there should be so many males and females 
always ready to repair the loss of a mated bird. Why 
do not such spare birds immediately pair together? 
Have we not some reason to suspect, and the suspicion 
has occurred to Mr. Jenner Weir, that as the courtship 
of birds appears to be in many cases prolonged and 
tedious, so it occasionally happens that certain males 
and females do not succeed, during the proper season, 
in exciting each other’s love, and consequently do not 
pair? This suspicion will appear somewhat less im- 
probable after we have seen what strong antipathies 
and preferences female birds occasionally evince towards 
particular males. 

Mental Qualities of Birds, and their Taste for the 
Beautiful . — Before we further discuss the question 
whether the females select the more attractive males 
or accept the first whom they may encounter, it will be 
advisable briefiy to consider the mental powers of birds. 
Their reason is generally, and perhaps justly, ranked 
as low ; yet some facts could be given ^ leading to an 


“ next day he came again and 
“ found two other charitable 
“ hawks, who had come with an 
“adopted feeling to succour the 
“ orphan. These two he killed, 
“and then left the nest. On 
“ returning afterwards he found 
“ two more charitable individuals 
“ on the same errand of mercy. 
“One of these he killed; the 
“other he also shot, but could 
“not lind. No more came on 
“ the like fruitless errand.” 

^ 1 am indebted to Prof. New- 
ton for the following passage 
from Mr. Adam’s ‘Travels of a 


Naturalist,’ 1870, p. 278. Speak- 
ing of Japanese nut-hatches in 
confinement, he says : “ Instead 
“ of the more yielding fruit of 
“ the yew, which is the usual 
“ food of the nut-hatch of Japan, 
“ at one time I substituted liard 
“hazel-nuts. As the bird was 
“ unable to crack them, he placed 
“ them one by one in his water- 
“ glass, evidently with the notion 
“ that they would in time become 
“ softer — an interesting proof of 
“ intelligence on the part of these 
“ birds.” 

2 S 


626 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt iL 


opposite conclusion. Low powers of reasoning, how- 
ever, are compatible, as we see with mankind, with 
strong affections, acute perception, and a taste for the 
beautiful ; and it is with these latter qualities that we 
are here concerned It has often been said that parrots 
become so deeply attached to each other that when one 
dies the other pines for a long time ; but Mr. Jenner 
Weir thinks that with most birds the strength of their 
affection has been much exaggerated. Nevertheless 
when one of a pair in a state of nature has been shot, 
the survivor has been heard for days afterwards uttering 
a plaintive call ; and Mr. St. John gives various facts 
proving the attachment of mated birds.^° Mr. Bennett 
relates that in China after a drake of the beautiful 
mandarin Teal had been stolen, the duck remained dis- 
consolate, though sedulously courted by another man- 
darin drake, who displayed before her all his charms. 
After an interval of three weeks the stolen drake was 
recovered, and instantly the pair recognised each other 
with extreme joy. On the other hand starlings, as we 
have seen, may be consoled thrice in the same day for 
the loss of their mates. Pigeons have such excellent 
local memories, that they have been known to return 
to their former homes after an interval of nine months, 
yet, as I hear from Mr. Harrison Weir, if a pair which 
naturally would remain mated for life be separated for 
a few weeks during the winter, and afterwards matched 
with other birds, the two, when brought together again, 
rarely, if ever, recognise each other. 

‘A Tour in Sutherlandshire,’ “ fretted and moped, refused her 
vol. i. 1849, p. 185. Dr. Duller “ food, and died of a broken 
says (‘Birds of New Zealand,’ “heart.” 

1872, p. 56) that a male King ‘ Wanderings in New South 

Lory was killed ; and the female Wales,’ vol. ii. 1834, p. 62. 


Chap. XIV. 


MENTAL QUALITIES. 


627 


Birds sometimes exhibit benevolent feelings; they 
will feed the deserted young ones even of distinct 
species, but this perhaps ought to be considered as a 
mistaken instinct. They will feed, as shewn in an earlier 
part of this work, adult birds of their own species which 
have become blind. Mr. Buxton gives a curious account 
of a parrot which took care of a frost-bitten and crippled 
bird of a distinct species, cleansed her feathers, and 
defended her from the attacks of the other parrots 
which roamed freely about his garden. It is a still 
more curious fact that these birds apparently evince 
some sympathy for the pleasures of their fellows. When 
a pair of cockatoos made a nest in an acacia tree, “ it 
“ was ridiculous to see the extravagant interest taken 
“in the matter by the others of the same species.” 
These parrots, also, evinced unbounded curiosity, and 
clearly had “the idea of property and possession.” 
They have good memories, for in the Zoological Gardens 
they have plainly recognised their former masters after 
an interval of some months. 

Birds possess^ acute powers of observation. Every 
mated bird, of course, recognises its fellow. Audubon 
states that a certain number of mocking-thrushes 
{Mimus polyglottus) remain all the year round in Loui- 
siana, whilst others migrate to the Eastern States; 
these latter, on their return, are instantly recognised, 
and always attacked, by their southern brethren. Birds 
under confinement distinguish different persons, as is 
proved by the strong and permanent antipathy or affec- 
tion which they shew, without any apparent cause, 
towards certain individuals. I have heard of numerous 

^ ‘Acclimatization of Parrots,’ Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ Nov. 1868, 
by C. Buxton, M.P. ‘Annals and p. 381. 


628 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part If 

instances with jays, partridges, canaries, and especially 
bullfinches. Mr. Hussey has described in how extra- 
ordinary a manner a tamed partridge recognised every- 
body : and its likes and dislikes were very strong. This 
bird seemed “ fond of gay colours, and no new gown or 
“ cap could be put on without catching his attention.” 
Mr. Hewitt has described^ the habits of some ducks 
(recently descended from wild birds), v/hich, at the 
approach of a strange dog or cat, would rush headlong 
into the water, and exhaust themselves in their attempts 
to escape ; but they knew Mr. Hewitt’s own dogs and 
cats so well that they would lie down and bask in the 
sun close to them. They always moved away from a 
strange man, and so they would from the lady who 
attended them if she made any great change in her 
dress. Audubon relates that he reared and tamed a 
wild turkey which always ran away from any strange 
dog ; this bird escaped into the woods, and some days 
afterwards Audubon saw, as he thought, a wild turkey, 
and made his dog chase it ; but, to his astonishment, 
the bird did not run away, and the dog, when he came 
up, did not attack the bird, for they mutually recognised 
each other as old friends. 

Mr. Jenner Weir is convinced that birds pay par- 
ticular attention to the colours of other birds, some- 
times out of jealousy, and sometimes as a sign of kinship. 
Thus he turned a reed-bunting (Emberiza schoeniculus), 
which had acquired its black head-dress, into his aviary, 
and the new-comer was not noticed by any bird, except 

‘ The Zoologist,’ 1 8 -t7-1848, 18, 1803, p. 39. Audubon on the 

p. 1602. wild turkey, ‘Omith. Biography,’ 

Hewitt on wild ducks, vol. i. p. 11. On the mocking- 
‘ Journal of Horticulture,’ Jan. thrush, ibid. vol. i. p. 110. 


Chap. XIV. 


TASTE FOR THE BEAUTIFUL. 


629 


by a bullfinch, wliicli is likewise black-headed. This 
bull finch was a very quiet bird, and had never before 
quarrelled with any of its comrades, including another 
reed-bunting, which had not as yet become black- 
headed : but the reed-bunting with a black head was 
so unmercifully treated that it had to be removed. 
Spiza cyanea, during the breeding-season, is of a bright 
blue colour ; and though generally peaceable, it attacked 
S. ciris, which has only the head blue, and completely 
scalped the unfortunate bird. Mr. Weir was also obliged 
to turn out a robinj as it fiercely attacked all the birds 
in his aviary with any red in their plumage, but no 
other kinds ; it actually killed a red-breasted crossbill, 
and nearly killed a goldfinch. On the other hand, he 
has observed that some birds, when first introduced, fly 
towards the species which resemble them most in colour, 
and settle by their sides. 

As male birds display their fine plumage and other 
ornaments with so much care before the females, it is 
obviously probable that these appreciate the beauty of 
their suitors. It is, however, difficult to obtain direct 
evidence of their capacity to appreciate beauty. When 
birds gaze at themselves in a looking-glass (of which 
many instances have been recorded) we cannot feel sure 
that it is not from jealousy of a supposed rival, though 
this is not the conclusion of some observers. In other 
cases it is difficult to distiuguish between mere curiosity 
and admiration. It is perhaps the former feeling which, 
stated by Lord Lilford,^^ attracts the ruff towards 
any bright object, so that, in the Ionian Islands, “it 
“ will dart down to a bright-coloured handkerchief, 
“ regardless of repeated shots.” The common lark is 
The ‘ Ibis/ vol. ii. 1800, p. 344. 


630 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


drawn down from the sky, and is caught in large 
numbers, by a small mirror made to move and glitter in 
the sun. Is it admiration or curiosity which leads the 
magpie, raven, and some other birds to steal and secrete 
bright objects, such as silver articles or jewels? 

Mr. G-ould states that certain humming-birds decorate 
the outsides of their nests ‘‘ with the utmost taste ; they 
“instinctively fasten thereon beautiful pieces of flat 
“ lichen, the larger pieces in the middle, and the smaller 
“ on the part attached to the branch. Now and then 
“ a pretty feather is intertwined or fastened to the outer 
“ sides, the stem being always so placed that the feather 
“ stands out beyond the surface.” The best evidence, 
however, of a taste for the beautiful is afforded by the 
three genera of Australian bower-birds already men- 
tioned. Their bowers (see fig. 46, p. 76), where the 
sexes congregate and play strange antics, are variously 
constructed, but what most concerns us is, that they 
are decorated by the several species in a different 
manner. The Satin bower-bird collects gaily-coloured 
articles, such as the blue tail-feathers of parrakeets, 
bleached bones and shells, ' which it sticks between 
the twigs or arranges at the entrance. Mr. Gould found 
in one bower a neatly-worked stone tomahawk and a 
slip of blue cotton, evidently procured from a native 
encampment. These objects are continually re-arranged, 
and carried about by the birds whilst at play. The 
bower of the Spotted bower-bird “ is beautifully lined 
“ with tall grasses, so disposed that the heads nearly 
“ meet, and the decorations are very profuse.” Bound 
stones are used to keep the grass-stems in their proper 
places, and to make divergent paths leading to the 
bower. The stones and shells are often brought from 


Chap. XIV. PREFERENCE BY THE FEMAT.E. 


631 


a great distance. The Kegent bird, as described by 
Mr. Eamsay, ornaments its short bower with bleached 
land-shells belonging to five or six species, and with 
“ berries of various colours, blue, red, and black, which 
“ give it when fresh a very pretty appearance. Besides 
“ these there were several newly-picked leaves and 
“ young shoots of a pinkish colour, the whole showing 
“a decided taste for the beautiful.” Well may Mr. 
Gould say that “ these highly decorated halls of as- 
“ sembly must be regarded as the most wonderful 
“ instances of bird-architecture yet discovered ; ” and 
the* taste, as we see, of the several species certainly 
differs.^® 

Preference for 'particular Males hy the Females . — 
Having made these preliminary remarks on the dis- 
crimination and taste of birds, I will give all the facts 
known to me which bear on the preference shewn by 
the female for particular males. It is certain that 
distinct species of birds occasionally pair in a state of 
nature and produce hybrids. Many instances could be 
.given : thus Macgillivray relates how a male blackbird 
and female thrush “fell in love with each other,” and 
produced offspring.^’ Several years ago eighteen cases 
had been recorded of the occurrence in Great Britain 
of hybrids between the black grouse and pheasant ; 
but most of these cases may perhaps be accounted for 
by solitary birds not finding one of their own species 

On the ornamented nests of 444-4G1. Ramsay, in the ‘ Ibi:?,’ 
humming-birds, Gould, ‘ Intro- 1867, p. 456. 
duction to the Trochilidse, 1861, ‘ Hist, of British Birds,’ voh 

p. 19. On the bower-birds, ii. p. 92. 

Gould, ‘ Handbook to the Birds ‘Zoologist,' 1853-1854, p. 

of Australia,’ 1865, vol. i. pp. 3946. 


632 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


to pair with. With other birds, as Mr. Jenner Weir 
has reason to believe, hybrids are sometimes the result 
of the casual intercourse of birds building in close 
proximity. But these remarks do not apply to the 
many recorded instances of tamed or domestic birds, 
belonging to distinct species, which have become abso- 
lutely fascinated with each other, although living with 
their own species. Thus Waterton states that out of 
a flock of twenty-three Canada geese, a female paired 
with a solitary Bernicle gander, although so different 
in appearance and size ; and they produced hybrid off- 
spring. A male wigeon {Mareca penelope), living with 
females of the same species, has been known to pair 
with a pintail duck, Querquedula acuta. Lloyd de- 
scribes the remarkable attachment between a shield- 
drake {Tadorna vulpamer) and a common duck. Many 
additional instances could be given; and the Eev. E. 
S. Dixon remarks that “ those who have kept many 
“ different species of geese together well know what 
“ unaccountable attachments they are frequently form- 
“ ing, and that they are quite as likely to pair and rear 
“ young with individuals of a race (species) apparently 
“ the most alien to themselves as with their own stock.” 
The Kev. W. D. Fox informs me that he possessed 
at the same time a pair of Chinese geese {Anser cygno- 
ides), and a common gander with three geese. The two 
lots kept quite separate, until the Chinese gander 


Watertou, ‘ Essays on Nat. 
Hist.’ 2nd series, pp. 42 and 117. 
For the following statements see 
on the wigeon, Loudon’s ‘ Mag. 
of Nat. Hist.’ vol. ix. p. 616 ; L. 
Lloyd, ‘ Scandinavian Adven- 
tures,’ vol. i. 1854, p. 452. 
Dixon, ‘ Ornamental and Do- 


mestic Poultry,’ p. 137 ; Hewitt, 
in ‘Journal of Horticulture,’ Jan. 
13, 1863, p. 40 ; Bechstein, ‘Stu- 
henvdgel,’ 1840, s. 230. Mr. J. 
Jenner Weir has lately given me 
an analogous case with ducks of 
two species. 


Chap. XIV. 


PKEFEREXCE BY THE FEMALE. 


633 


seduced one of the coiiimoii geese to live with him. 
Moreover, of the young birds hatched from the eggy 
of the common geese, only four were pure, the other 
eighteen proving hybrids ; so that the Chinese gander 
seems to have had prepotent charms over the common 
gander. I will give only one other case ; Mr. Hewitt 
states that a wild duck, reared in captivity, “ after 
“ breeding a couple of seasons with her own mallard, at 
“ once shook him off on my placing a male Pintail on 
“ the water. It was evidently a case of love at first 
“ sight, for she swam about the new-comer caressingly, 
“ though he appeared evidently alarmed and averse to 
“ her overtures of affection. From that hour she forgot 
“ her old partner. Winter passed by, and the next 
“ spring the Pintail seemed to have become a convert 
“ to her blandishments, for they nested and produced 
“ seven or eight young ones.” 

What the charm may have been in these several cases, 
beyond mere novelty,we cannot even conjecture. Colour, 
however, sometimes comes into play; for in order to 
raise hybrids from the siskin {Fringilla spinus) and the 
canary, it is much the best plan, according to Bechstein, 
to place birds of the same tint together. Mr. Jenner 
Weir turned a female canary into his aviary, where 
there were male linnets, goldfinches, siskins, green- 
finches, chaffinches, and other birds, in order to see 
which she would choose; but there never was any 
doubt, and the greenfinch carried the day. They paired 
and produced hybrid offspring. 

The fact of the female preferring to pair with one 
male rather than with another of the same species is 
not so likely to excite attention, as when this occurs, 
as we have just seen, between distinct species. The 


634 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part fl 

former cases can best be observed with domesticated or 
confined birds ; but these are often pampered by high 
feeding, and sometimes have their instincts vitiated 
to an extreme degree. Of this latter fact I could give 
sufficient proofs with pigeons, and especially with fowls, 
but they cannot be here related. Vitiated instincts 
may also account for some of the hybrid unions above 
mentioned ; but in many of these cases the birds were 
allowed to range freely over large ponds, and there is 
no reason to suppose that they were unnaturally stimu- 
lated by high feeding. 

With respect to birds in a state of nature, the first 
and most obvious supposition which will occur to every 
one is that the female at the proper season accepts the 
first male whom she may encounter ; but she has at 
least the opportunity for exerting a choice, as she is 
almost invariably pursued by many males. Audubon 
— and we must remember that he spent a long life in 
prowling about the forests of the United States and 
observing the birds — does not doubt that the female 
deliberately chooses her mate ; thus, speaking of a 
woodpecker, he says the hen is followed by half-a-dozeji 
gay suitors, who continue performing strange antics, 
‘Mmtil a marked preference is shewn for one.” The 
female of the red- winged starling (Agelmus phoeniceus) 
is likewise pursued by several males, “ until, becoming 
“fatigued, she alights, receives their addresses, and 
“ soon makes a choice.” He describes also how several 
male night-jars repeatedly plunge through the air with 
astonishing rapidity, suddenly turning, and thus making 
a singular noise; “but no sooner has the female made 
“her choice than the other males are driven away.” 
With one of the vultures {Gathartes aura) of the United 


Chap. XTV. PREFERENCE BY THE FEMALE. 


635 


States, parties of eight, ten, or more males and females 
assemble on fallen logs, “ exhibiting the strongest desire 
“to please mutually,” and after many caresses, each 
male leads off his partner on the wing, xiudubon like- 
wise carefully observed the wild flocks of Canada geese 
(Anser canadensis)^ and gives a graphic description of 
their love-antics ; he says that the birds which had 
been previously mated “ renewed their courtship as early 
“ as the month of January, while the others would be 
“ contending or coquetting for hours every day, until 
“ all seemed satisfied with the choice they had made, 
“ after which, although they remained together, any 
“person could easily perceive that they were careful 
“ to keep in pairs. I have observed also that the older 
“ the birds the shorter were the preliminaries of their 
“ courtship. The bachelors and old maids whether in 
“ regret, or not caring to be disturbed by the bustle, 
“ quietly moved aside and lay down at some distance 
“ from the rest.” Many similar statements with 
respect to other birds could be cited from this same 
observer. 

Turning now to domesticated and confined birds, I will 
commence by giving what little I have learnt respect- 
ing the courtship of fowls. 1 have received long letters 
on this subject from Messrs. Hewitt and Tegetmeier, 
and almost an essay from the late Mr. Brent. It will be 
admitted by every one that these gentlemen, so well 
known from their published works, are careful and 
experienced observers. They do not believe that the 
females prefer certain males on account of the beauty 
of their plumage ; but some allowance must be made for 

^ Audubon, ‘ Ornitholog. Biography,’ vol. i. pp. 191, 349; vol. ii. 
pp. 42, 275; vol. iii. p. 2. 


636 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Fart IT. 


the artificial state imcler which these birds have long 
been kept. Mr. Tegetmeier is convinced that a game- 
cock, though disfigured by being dubbed and with his 
hackles trimmed, would be accepted as readily as a male 
retaining all his natural ornaments. Mr. Brent, how- 
ever, admits that the beauty of the male probably aids 
in exciting the female ; and her acquiescence is neces- 
sary. Mr. Hewitt is convinced that the union is by no 
means left to mere chance, for the female almost in- 
variably prefers the most vigorous, defiant, and mettle- 
some male ; hence it is almost useless, as he remarks, 
“ to attempt true breeding if a game-cock in good health 
“and condition runs the locality, for almost every hen 
“ on leaving the roosting-place will resort to the game- 
“ cock, even though that bird may not actually drive 
“ away the male of her own variety.” Under ordinary 
circumstances the males and females of the fowl seem to 
come to a mutual understanding by means of certain 
gestures, described to me by Mr. Brent. But hens will 
often avoid the officious attentions of young males. 
Old hens, and hens of a pugnacious disposition, as the 
same writer informs me, dislike strange males, -and will 
not yield until well beaten into compliance. Ferguson, 
however, describes how a quarrelsome hen was subdued 
by the gentle courtship* of a Shanghai cock.^^ 

There is reason to believe that pigeons of both sexes 
prefer pairing with birds of the same breed; and 
dovecot-pigeons dislike all the highly improved breeds.^^ 
Mr. Harrison Weir has lately heard from a trustworthy 
observer, who keeps blue pigeons, that these drive away 

‘ Bare and Prize Poultry,’ and Plants under Domestication,* 
1854, p. 27. ^ vol. ii. p. 103. 

‘The Variation of Animals 


Ohap. XlY. rREFP:ilENCE BY THE FEMALE. 63 ? 


all other coloured varieties, such as white, red, and 
yellow; and from another olserver, that a female dun 
carrier could not, after repeated trials, he matched with 
a black male, but immediately paired with a dun. 
Again, Mr. Tegetmeier had a female blue turbit that 
obstinately refused to pair with two males of the same 
breed, which were successively shut up with her for 
weeks ; but on being let out she would have immediately 
accepted the first blue dragon that offered. As she was 
a valuable bird, she was then shut up for many weeks 
with a silver (i.e., very pale blue) male, and at last 
mated with him. Nevertheless, as a general rule, colour 
appears to have little influence on the pairing of pigeons. 
Mr. Tegetmeier, at my request, stained some of his birds 
with magenta, hut they were not much noticed by the 
others. 

Female pigeons occasionally feel a strong antipathy 
towards certain males, without any assignable cause. 
Thus MM. Boitard and Corbie, whose experience ex- 
tended over forty-five years, state : “ Quand une femelle 
“ eprouve de I’antipathie pour un male avec lequel on 
‘‘ vent I’accoupler, malgre tons les feux de I’amour, 
“ malgre I’alpiste et le chenevis dont on la nourrit pour 
‘‘ augmenter son ardeur, malgre un emprisonnement de 
“ six mois et meme d’un an, elle refuse constamment ses 
“caresses; les avances empressees, les agaceries, les 
“ tournoiemens, les tendres roucoulemens, rien ne pent 
“ lui plaire ni lemouvoir ; gonflee, houdeuse, hlottie dans 
“ un coin de sa prison, elle n’en sort que pour boire et 
“ manger, ou pour repousser avec une espece de rage des 
“ caresses devenues trop pressantes.” On the other 

“ Boitard and Corbie, ‘ Les Prosper Lucas (‘ Traite de ITle- 
Pigeons, &c.,’ 1824, p. 12. red. Nat.’ tom. ii. 1850, p. 2UG) 


638 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


hand, Mr. Harrison Weir has himself observed, and has 
heard from several breeders, that a female pigeon will 
occasionally take a strong fancy for a particular male, 
and will desert her own mate for him. Some females, 
according to another experienced observer, Riedel, are 
of a profligate disposition, and prefer almost any stranger 
to their own mate. Some amorous males, called by our 
English fanciers gay birds,” are so successful in their 
gallantries, that, as Mr. H. Weir informs me, they must 
be shut up on account of the mischief which they cause. 

Wild turkeys in the United States, according to 
Audubon, “ sometimes pay their addresses to the 
“ domesticated females, and are generally received by 
‘‘ them with great pleasure.” So that these females 
apparently prefer the wild to their own males.^® 

Here is a more curious case. Sir R. Heron during 
many years kept an account of the habits of the pea- 
fowl, which he bred in large numbers. He states that 
“ the hens have frequently great preference to a parti- 
“ cular peacock. They were all so fond of an old pied 
“ cock, that one year, when he was confined, though still 
“in view, they were constantly assembled close to the 
“ trellice-walls of his prison, and would not suffer a 
“japanned peacock to touch them. On his being let 
“ out in the autumn, the oldest of the hens instantly 
“ courted him and was successful in her courtship. The 
“ next year he was shut up in a stable, and then the 
“ hens all courted his rival.” This rival was a japanned 


has himself observed nearly vol. i. p. 13. See to the same effect, 

similar facts with pigeons. Dr. Bryant, in ‘ Allen’s Mammals 

‘ Die Tauhenzucht,’ 1824, and Birds of Florida,’ p. 344. 

8. 86. ^ ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1835, p. 

^ ^Ornithological Biography,’ 54. The japanned peacock is 


Chap. XlV. 


PREFEKENCE BY THE FEMALE. 


639 


or black- winged peacock, to our eyes a more beautiful 
bird than the common kind. 

Idchtenstein, who was a good observer and had ex- 
cellent opportunities of observation at the Cape of Grood 
Hope, assured Eudolphi that the female widow-bird 
{Cliera progne) disowns the male when robbed of the 
long tail-feathers with which he is ornamented during 
the breeding-season. I presume that this observation 
must have been made on birds under confinement.^’ 
Here is an analogous case ; Dr. Jaeger,^® director of the 
Zoological Gardens of Vienna, states that a male silver- 
pheasant, who had been triumphant over all other males 
and was- the accepted lover of the females, had his orna- 
mental plumage spoiled. He was then immediately 
superseded by a rival, who got the upper hand and after- 
wards led the flock. 

It is a remarkable fact, as shewing how important 
colour is in the courtship of birds, that Mr. Boardman, 
a well-known collector and observer of birds for many 
years in the Northern United States, has never in his 
large experience seen an albino paired with another bird; 
yet he has had opportunities of observing many albinos 
belonging to several species.^* It can hardly be main- 
tained that albinos in a state of nature are incapable of 
breeding, as they can be raised with the greatest facility 
under confinement. It appears, therefore, that we 


considered by Mr. Sclater as a 
distinct species, and has been 
named Pavo nigripennis \ but 
the evidence seems to me to show 
that it is only a variety. 

^ Rudolphi, ‘Beytrage zur 
Anthropologic,’ 1812, s. 184. 

“ ‘ Die Darwin’sche Theorie, 


iind ihre Stellung zu Moral und 
Religion,’ 1869, s. 69. 

® This statement is given by 
Mr. A. Leith Adams, in his ‘ Field 
and Forest Rambles,’ 1873, p. 
76, and accords with his own 
experience. 


640 THE DESCENT OF i^lAN. Tart it. 

must attribute the fact that they do not pair to their 
rejection by their normally coloured comrades. 

Female birds not only exert a choice, but in some few 
cases they court the male, or even fight together for 
his possession. . Sir E. Heron states that with peafowl, 
the first advances are always made by the female ; some- 
thing of the same kind takes place, according to Audu- 
bon, with the older females of the wild turkey. With 
the capercailzie, the females flit round the male whilst 
he is parading at one of the places of assemblage, and 
solicit his attention.^® We have seen that a tame wild- 
duck seduced an unwilling pintail drake after a long 
courtship. Mr. Bartlett believes that the Lophophorus, 
like many other gallinaceous birds, is naturally poly- 
gamous, but two females cannot be placed in the same 
cage with a male, as they fight so much together. The 
following instance of rivalry is more surprising as it 
relates to bullfinches, which usually pair for life. Mr. 
Jenner Weir introduced a dull-coloured and ugly female 
into his aviary, and she immediately attacked another 
mated female so unmercifully that the latter had to be 
separated. The new female did all the courtship, and 
was at last successful, for she paired with the male; 
but after a time she met with a just retribution, for, 
ceasing to be pugnacious, she was replaced by the old 
female, and the male then deserted his new and returned 
to his old love. 

In all ordinary cases the male is so eager that he will 
accept any female, and does not, as far as we can judge, 

In regard to peafowl, see 1848, p. 8. For the turkey, 
Sir 11. Heron, ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ Audubon, ibid. p. 4. For the 
1835, p. 54, and the Eev. E. S. capercailzie, Lloyd, ‘ Game Birds 
Dixon, ‘ Ornamental Poultry,’ of Sweden,’ 1867, p. 23. 


CUAF. XIV. 


PltKFERENOE BY THE FEMALE. 


641 


prefer one to the other ; but, as we shall hereafter see, 
exceptions to this rule apparently occur in some few 
groups. With domesticated birds, I have heard of only 
one case of males shewing any preference for certain 
females, namely, that of the domestic cock, who, accord- 
ing to the high authority of Mr. Hewitt, prefers the 
younger to the older hens. On the other hand, in effect- 
ing hybrid unions between the male pheasant and 
common hens, Mr. Hewitt is convinced that the 
pheasant invariably prefers the older birds. He does 
not appear to be in the least influenced by their colour ; 
but “ is most capricious in his attachments from 
some inexplicable cause he shews the most determined 
aversion to certain hens, which no .care on the part of 
the breeder can overcome. Mr. Hewitt informs me that 
some hens are quite unattractive even to the males of 
their own species, so that they may be kept with several 
cocks during a whole season, and not one egg out of 
forty or fifty will prove fertile. On the other hand, with 
the Long-tailed duck {Rarelda glacialis), ‘‘ it has been 
“ remarked,” says M. Ekstrdm, “ that certain females 
“ are much more courted than the rest. Frequently, 
“ indeed, one sees an individual surrounded by six or 
“ eight amorous males.” Whether this statement is 
credible, I know not ; but the native sportsmen shoot 
these females in order to stuff them as decoys.^^ 

With respect to female birds feeling a preference for 
particular males, we must bear in mind that we can 
judge of choice being exerted only by analogy. If an 
inhabitant of another planet were to behold a number 

Mr. Hewitt, quoted in Quoted in Lloyd’s, ‘ Game 

‘ Tegetmeier’s Poultry Book,’ Birds of Sweden,’ p. 345. 

1866, p. 165. ‘ o ^ 


642 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II, 


of young rustics at a fair courting a pretty girl, and 
quarrelling about her like birds at one of tbeir places 
of assemblage, be would, by the eagerness of the wooers 
to please her and to display their finery, infer that she 
had the power of choice. Now with birds the evidence 
stands thus: they have acute powers of observation, 
and they seem to have some taste for the beautiful both 
in colour and sound. It is certain that the females 
occasionally exhibit, from unknown causes, the strongest 
antipathies and preferences for particular males. When 
the sexes differ in colour or in other ornaments the 
males with rare exceptions are the more decorated, 
either permanently or temporarily during the breeding- 
season. They sedulously display their various orna- 
ments, exert their voices, and perform strange antics 
in the presence of the females. Even well-armed 
males, who, it might be thought, would altogether 
depend for success on the law of battle, are in most cases 
highly ornamented ; and their ornaments have been 
acquired at the expense of some loss of power. In 
other cases ornaments have been acquired, at the cost 
of increased risk from birds and beasts of prey. With 
various species many individuals of both sexes congre- 
gate at the same spot, and their courtship is a prolonged 
affair. There is even reason to suspect that the males 
and females within the same district do not always 
succeed in pleasing each other and pairing. 

What then are we to conclude from these facts and 
considerations ? Does the male parade his charms with 
so much pomp and rivalry for no purpose ? Are we not 
justified in believing that the female exerts a choice, 
and that she receives the addresses of the male who 
pleases her most? It is not probable that she con- 


Chap. XIV. 


VARIABILITY 


643 


sciously deliberates ; but she is most excited or attracted 
by the most beautiful, or melodious, or gallant males. 
Nor need it be supposed that the female studies each 
stripe or spot of colour ; that the peahen, for instance, 
admires each detail in the gorgeous train of the peacock 
— she is probably struck only by the general effect. 
Nevertheless, after hearing how carefully the male 
Argus pheasant displays his elegant primary wing- 
feathers, and erects his ocellated plumes in the right 
position for their full effect ; or again, how the male 
goldfinch alternately displays his gold-bespangled 
wings, we ought not to feel too sure that the female 
does not attend to each detail of beauty. We can judge, 
as already remarked, of choice being exerted, only from 
analogy ; and the mental powers of birds do not differ 
fundamentally from ours. From these various con- 
siderations we may conclude that the pairing of birds is 
not left to chance ; but that those males, which are best 
able by their various charms to please or excite the 
female, are under ordinary circumstances accepted. If 
this be admitted, there is not much difficulty in under- 
standing how male birds have gradually acquired their 
ornamental characters. All animals present individual 
differences, and as man can modify his domesticated 
birds by selecting the individuals which appear to him 
the most beautiful, so the habitual or even occasional 
preference by the female of the more attractive males 
would almost certainly lead to their modification ; and 
such modifications might in the course of time be 
augmented to almost any extent, compatible with the 
existence of the species. 

Variahility of Birds, and especially of their Secondary 
Sexual Characters , — Variability and inheritance are the 


644 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut II. 


foundations for the work of selection. That domesti- 
cated birds have varied greatly, their variations being 
inherited, is certain. That birds in a state of nature 
have been modified into distinct races is now universally 
admitted.®^ Variations may be divided into two classes ; 
those which appear to our ignorance to arise spontane- 
ously, and those which are directly related to the 
surrounding conditions, so that all or nearly all the 
individuals of the same species are similarly modified. 
Cases of the latter kind have recently been observed 
with care by Mr. J. A. Allen,^^ who shews that in the 
United States many species of birds gradually become 


^ According to Dr. Blasius 
(‘Ibis,’ vol. ii. 1860, p. 297), 
there are 425 indubitable species 
of birds which breed in Europe, 
besides sixty forms, which are 
frequently regarded as distinct 
species. Of the latter, Blasius 
thinks that only ten are really 
doubtful, and that the other fifty 
ought to be united with their 
nearest allies; but this shews 
that there must be a consider- 
able amount of variation with 
some of our European birds. It 
is also an unsettled point with 
naturalists, whether several 
North American birds ou.’ht to 
be ranked as specifically distinct 
from the corresponding European 
species. Bo again many North 
American forms which until 
lately were named as distinct 
species, are now considered to be 
local races. 

‘ Mammals and Birds of 
East Florida,’ also an ‘ Ornitho- 
logical Keconnaissance of Kan- 
sas, &c.’ Notwithstanding the 
influ 3nce of climate on the 


colours of birds, it is difficult to 
account for the dull or dark tints 
of almost all the species inhabit- 
ing certain countries, for instance, 
the Galapagos Islands imder the 
equator, the wide temperate 
plains of Patagonia, and, as it 
appears, Egypt (see Mr. Harts- 
horn e in the ‘ American Natura- 
list,’ 1873, p. 747). These 
countries are open, and afford 
little shelter to birds ; but it 
seems doubtful whether the ab- 
sence of brightly coloured species 
can be explained on the prin- 
ciple of protection, for on the 
Pampas, which are equally open, 
though covered by green grass, 
and where the birds would be 
equally exposed to danger, many 
brilliant and conspicuously 
coloured species are common. 
I have sometimes speculated 
whether the prevailing dull tints 
of the scenery in the above 
named countries may not have 
affected the appreciation of bright 
colours by the birds inhabiting 
them. 


Chap. XIV. 


VARIABILITY. 


645 


more strongly coloured in proceeding southward, and 
more lightly coloured in proceeding westward to the arid 
plains of the interior. Both sexes seem generally to 
be affected in a like manner, hut sometimes one sex more 
than the other. This result is not incompatible with 
the belief that the colours of birds are mainly due to 
the accumulation of successive variations through sexual 
selection ; for even after the sexes have been greatly 
differentiated, climate might produce an equal effect on 
both sexes, or a greater effect on one sex than on the 
other, owing to some constitutional difference. 

Individual differences between the members of the 
same species are admitted by every one to occur under 
a state of nature. Sudden and strongly marked varia- 
tions are rare ; it is also doubtful whether if beneficial 
they would often be preserved through selection and 
transmitted to succeeding generations.^^ Nevertheless, 
it may be worth while to give the few cases which I have 
been able to collect, relating chiefly to colour, — simple 
albinism and melanism being excluded. Mr. Gould is 
well known to admit the existence of few varieties, for 


“ ‘Origin of Species, fifth 
edit. 1869, p. 104. 1 had always 
perceived, that rare and strongly- 
marked deviations of structure, 
deserving to be called monstrosi- 
ties, could seldom be preserved 
through natural selection, and 
that the preservation of even 
highly-beneficial variationswould 
depend to a certain extent on 
chance. I had also fully appre- 
ciated the importance of mere 
individual differences, and this 
led me to insist so strongly on 
the importance of that uncon- 
scious form of selection by man. 


which follows from the preserva- 
tion of the most valued indi- 
viduals of each breed, without 
any intention on his part to 
modify the characters of the 
breed. But until I read an able 
article in the ‘ North British Re- 
view’ (March 1867, p. 289, et 
seq.), which has been of more use 
to me than any other Review, I 
did not see how great the chances 
were against the preservation of 
variations, whether slight or 
strongly pronounced, occurring 
only in single individuals. 


646 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


he esteems very slight differences as specific; yet he 
states that near Bogota certain humming-birds be- 
longing to the genus Cynanthus are divided into two 
or three races or varieties, which differ from each other 
in the colouring of the tail — “ some having the whole 
“ of the feathers blue, while others have the eight central 
“ ones tipped with beautiful green.” It does not appear 
that intermediate gradations have been observed in this 
or the following cases. In the males alone of one of the 
Australian parrakeets “ the thighs in some are scarlet, 
“ in others grass-green.” In another parrakeet of the 
same country “ some individuals have the band across 
“ the wing-coverts bright-yellow, while in others the 
“ same part is tinged with red.” In the United States 
some few of the males of the Scarlet Tanager {Tanagra 
rubra) have “ a beautiful transverse band of glowing red 
“ on the smaller wing-coverts ; ” but this variation 
seems to be somewhat rare, so that its preservation 
through sexual selection would follow only under un- 
usually favourable circumstances. In Bengal the 
Honey buzzard {Pernis cristata) has either a small rudi- 
mental crest on its head, or none at all : so slight a 
difference, however, would not have been worth notice, 
had not this same species possessed in Southern India 
“ a well-marked occipital crest formed of several gradu- 
“ ated feathers.” 

The following case is in some respects more interest- 
ing. A pied variety of the raven, with the head, breast, 
abdomen, and parts of the wings and tail-feathers white, 

^ ‘Introduct. to the Trochi- Audubon,* Ornitholog. Bio- 

lidse,’ p. 102. graphy,’ 1838, vol. iv. p. 389. 

Gould, ‘ Handbook to Birds Jerdon, ‘Birds of India,’ 

of Australia,’ vol. ii. pp. 32 vol. i. p. 108 ; and Mr. Blyth, in 
and 68. ‘ Land and Water,’ 18G8, p. 381 , 


Chap. XIV. 


VARIABILITY. 


647 


is confined to the Feroe Islands. It is not very rare 
there, for Graha saw during his visit from eight to ten 
living specimens. Although the characters of this 
variety are not quite constant, yet it has been named by 
several distinguished ornithologists as a distinct species. 
The fact of the pied birds being pursued and persecuted 
with much clamour by the other ravens of the island 
was the chief cause which led Briinnich to conclude that 
they were specifically distincf ; but this is now known 
to he an error.^° This case seems analogous to that 
lately given of albino birds not pairing from being 
rejected by their comrades. 

In various parts of the northern seas a remarkable 
variety of the common Guillemot (Uria troile) is found ; 
and in Feroe, one out of every five birds, according 
to Graba’s estimation, presents this variation. It is 
characterised'^^ by a pure white ring round the eye, 
with a curved narrow white line, an inch and a half in 
length, extending back from the ring. This conspicuous 
character has caused the bird to be ranked by several 
ornithologists as a distinct species under the name of 
U. lacrijmans, but it is now known to be merely a variety. 
It often pairs with the common kind, yet intermediate 
gradations have never been seen ; nor is this surprising, 
for variations which appear suddenly, are often, as I 
have elsewhere shewn,"^*^ transmitted either unaltered 
or not at all. We thus see that two distinct forms of 
the same species may co-exist in the same district, and 
we cannot doubt that if the one had possessed any ad- 

Graba, ‘ Tagebiich Reise Graba, ibid. s. 54. MacgiL 

nach Faro,’ 1830, s. 51-54. Mac- Jivray, ibid. vol. v. p. 327. 
gillivray, ‘ Hist. British Birds,’ ‘ Variation of Animals and 

vol. iii. p. 745. ‘ Ibis,’ vol. v. Plants under Domestication,,’ 
1863, p. 469. voL ii. p. 92. 


648 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt T1 


vantage over the other, it would soon have been multi- 
plied to the exclusion of the latter. If, for instance, 
the male pied ravens, instead of being persecuted by 
their comrades, had been highly attractive (like the 
above pied peacock) to the black female ravens, their 
numbers would have rapidly increased. And this would 
have been a case of sexual selection. 

With respect to the slight individual differences which 
are common, in a greater or less degree, to all the 
members of the same species, we have every reason to 
believe that they are by far the most important for the 
the work of selection. Secondary sexual characters are 
eminently liable to vary, both with animals in a state 
of nature and under domestication.'*^ There is also 
reason to believe, as we have seen in our eighth chapter, 
that variations are more apt to occur in the male than 
in the female sex. All these contingencies are highly 
favourable for sexual selection. Whether characters 
thus acquired are transmitted to one sex or to both sexes, 
depends, as we shall see in the following chapter, on the 
form of inheritance which prevails. 

It is sometimes difficult to form an opinion whether 
certain slight differences between the sexes of birds are 
simply the result of variability with sexually-limited 
inheritance, without the aid of sexual selection, or 
whether they have been augmented through this latter 
process. I do not here refer to the many instances 
where the male displays splendid colours or other orna- 
ments, of which the female partakes to a slight degree ; 
for these are almost certainly due to characters primarily 
acquired by the male having been more or less trans- 

On these points see also under Domestication,’ vol. i. p 
‘Variationof Animals and Plants 253; vol. ii. pp. 73, 75. 


Chap. XIV. 


VARIABILITY. 


649 


ferred to the female. But what are we to conclude* with 
respect to certain birds in which, for instance, the eyes 
differ slightly in colour in the two sexes ? In some 
cases the eyes differ conspicuously ; thus with the storks 
of the genus XenorhynehuSy those of the male are black- 
ish-hazel, whilst those of the females are gamboge- 
yellow ; with many hornbills (Buceros), as I hear from 
Mr. Blyth,^^ the males have intense crimson eyes, and 
those of the females are white. In the Buceros hicornis, 
the hind margin of the casque and a stripe on the crest 
of the beak are black in the male, but not so in the 
female. Are we to suppose that these black marks and 
the crimson colour of the eyes have been preserved or 
augmented through sexual selection in the males ? This 
is very doubtful ; for Mr. Bartlett shewed me in the 
Zoological Gardens that the inside of the mouth of this 
Buceros is black in the male and flesh-coloured in the 
female ; and their external appearance or beauty would 
not be thus affected. I observed in Chili that the iris 
in the condor, when about a year old, is dark-brown, but 
changes at maturity into yellowish-brown in the male, 
and into bright red in the female. The male has also 
a small, longitudinal, leaden-coloured, fleshy crest or 
comb. The comb of many gallinaceous birds is highly 
ornamental, and assumes vivid colours during the act of 
courtship ; but what are we to think of the dull-coloured 
comb of the condor, which does not appear to us in the 
least ornamental? The same question may be asked 
in regard to various other characters, such as the knob 

** See, for instance, on the See also Jerdon, ‘Birds of 

irides of a Podica and Gallicrex India,’ vol. i. pp. 243-245. 
in ‘ Ibis,’ vol. ii. 1860, p. 206 ; ‘ Zoology of the Voyage of 

and vol. v. 1863, p. 426. H.M.S. Beagle,’ 1841, p. 6. 


650 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


on tho base of the beak of the Chinese goose {Anser 
cygnoides), which is much larger in the male than in 
the female. No certain answer can be given to these 
questions ; but we ought to be cautious in assuming that 
knobs and various fleshy appendages cannot be attrac* 
tive to the female, when we remember that with savage 
races of man various hideous deformities — deep scars on 
the face with the flesh raised into protuberances, the 
septum of the nose pierced by sticks or bones, holes in 
the ears and lips stretched widely open — are all admired 
as ornamental. 

Whether or not unimportant differences between the 
sexes, such as those just specified, have been preserved 
through sexual selection, these differences, as well as all 
others, must primarily depend on the laws of variation. 
On the principle of correlated development, the plumage 
often varies on diflerent parts of the body, or over the 
whole body, in the same manner. We see this well 
illustrated in certain breeds of the fowl. In all the 
breeds the feathers on the neck and loins of the males 
are elongated, and are called hackles ; now when both 
sexes acquire a top-knot, which is a new character in 
the genus, the feathers on the head of the male become 
hackle-shaped, evidently on the principle of correlation ; 
whilst those on the head of the female are of the 
ordinary shape. The colour also of the hackles forming 
the top-knot of the male, is often correlated with that 
of the hackles on the neck and loins, as may be seen by 
comparing these feathers in the Golden and Silver- 
spangled Polish, the Houdans, and Creve-coeur breeds. 
In some natural species we may observe exactly the same 
correlation in the colours of these same feathers, as in 
the males of the splendid Gold and Amherst pheasants. 


Chap. XTV. 


VARIABILITY. 


651 


The structure of each individual feather generally 
causes any change in its colouring to be symmetrical ; 
we see this in the various laced, spangled, and pencilled 
breeds of the fowl ; and on the principle of correlation 
the feathers over the whole body are often coloured in 
the same manner. We are thus enabled without much 
trouble to rear breeds with their plumage marked almost 
as symmetrically as in natural species. In laced and 
spangled fowls the coloured margins of the feathers are 
abruptly defined ; but in a mongrel raised by me from 
a black Spanish cock glossed with green, and a white 
game-hen, all the feathers were greenish-black, except- 
ing towards their extremities, which were yellowish- 
white ; but between the white extremities and the black 
bases, there was on each feather a symmetrical, curved 
zone of dark-brown. In some instances the shaft of the 
feather determines the distribution of the tints ; thus 
with the body-feathers of a mongrel from the same black 
Spanish cock and a silver-spangled Polish hen, the shaft, 
together with a narrow space on each side, was greenish- 
black, and this was surrounded by a regular zone of 
dark-brown, edged with brownish- white. In these 

cases we have feathers symmetrically shaded, like those 
which give so much elegance to the plumage of many 
natural species. I have also noticed a variety of the 
common pigeon with the wing-bars symmetrically zoned 
with three bright shades, instead of being simply black 
on a slaty-blue ground, as in the parent-species. 

In many groups of birds the plumage is differently 
coloured in the several species, yet certain spots, marks, 
or stripes are retained by all. Analogous cases occur 
with the breeds of the pigeon, which usually retain the 
two wing-bars, though they may be coloured red, yellow, 


652 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


white, hlack, or blue, the rest of the plumage being of 
some wholly different tint. Here is a more curious 
case, in which certain marks are retained, though 
coloured in a manner almost exactly the opposite of 
what is natural ; the aboriginal pigeon has a blue tail, 
with the terminal halves of the outer webs of the two 
outer tail feathers white; now there is a sub- variety 
having a white instead of a blue tail, with precisely that 
part hlack which is white in the parent-species.'*’ 
Formation and Variahility of the Ocelli or eye-lihe 
Spots on the Flumage of Birds. — As no ornaments are 
more beautiful than the ocelli on the feathers of various 
birds, on the hairy coats of some mammals, on the scales 
of reptiles and fishes, on the skin of amphibians, on the 
wings of many Lepidoptera and other insects, they 
deserve to he especially noticed. An ocellus consists of 
a spot within a ring of another colour, like the pupil 
within the iris, but the central spot is often surrounded 
by additional concentric zones. The ocelli on the tail- 
coverts of the peacock offer a familiar example, as well 
as those on the wings of the peacock-butterfly (Vanessa). 
Mr. Trimen has given me a description of a S. African 
moth {Gynanisa ms), allied to our Emperor moth, in 
which a magnificent ocellus occupies nearly the whole 
surface of each hinder wing; it consists of a black 
centre, including a semi-transparent crescent-shaped 
mark, surrounded by successive, ochre-yellow, black, 
ochre-yellow, pink, white, pink, brown, and whitish 
zones. Although we do not know the steps by which 
these wonderfully beautiful and complex ornaments 
have been developed, the process has probably been a 

Bechstein, ‘ Naturgeschichte Deutschlands/ B. iv. 1795, s. 31, 
on a sub-variety of the Monck pigeon. 


Chap. XIV. 


OCELLI. 


653 


simple one, at least with insects; for, as Mr. Trimen 
writes to me, “ no characters of mere marking or colora- 
“ tion are so unstable in the Lepidoptera as the ocelli, 
“both in number and size.” Mr. Wallace, who first 
called my attention to this subject, shewed me a series 
of specimens of our common meadow-brown butterfly 
(Eipparchia janira) exhibiting numerous gradations 
from a simple minute black spot to an elegantly-shaded 
ocellus. In a S. African butterfly {Gyllo leda^ Linn.), 
belonging to the same family, the ocelli are even still 
more variable. In some specim-ens (A, fig. 53) large 
spaces on the upper surface of the wings are coloured 
black, and include irregular white marks; and from 
this state a complete gradation can be traced into a 
tolerably perfect ocellus (A^), and this results from the 
contraction of the irregular blotches of colour. In an- 
other series of specimens a gradation can be followed 
from excessively minute white dots, surrounded by a 
scarcely visible black line (B),into perfectly symmetrical 
and large ocelli (B^).'*® In cases like these, the develop- 
ment of a perfect ocellus does not require a long course 
of variation and selection. 

With birds and many other animals, it seems to 
follow from the comparison of allied species that circular 
spots are often generated by the breaking up and con- 
traction of stripes. In the Tragopan pheasant faint 
white lines in the female represent the beautiful white 
spots in the male;^® and something of the same kind 

^ This woodcut has been en- of the wings of this butterfly, in 
graved from a beautiful drawing, his ‘ Rhopalocera Africfe Austra- 
most kindly made for me by Mr. lis,’ p. 186. 

Trimen ; see also his description Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ vol. 

of the wonderful amount of vari- lii. p. 517. 
ation in the coloration and shape 


654 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


may be observed in the two sexes of the Argus pheasant. 
However this may be, appearances strongly favour the 
belief that on the one hand, a dark spot is often formed 
by the colouring matter being drawn towards a central 
point from a surrounding zone, which latter is thus 
rendered lighter ; and, on the other hand, that a white 
spot is often formed by the colour being driven away 
from a central point, so that it accumulates in a sur- 


Fig. 53. Cyllo leda, Linn., from a drawing by Mr. Trimen, shewing the extreme 
range of variation in the ocelli. 

A. Specimen, from IWauritius, upper B. Specimen, from Java, upper surface 


rouoding darker zone. In either case an ocellus is the 
result. The colouring matter seems to be a nearly 
constant quantity, but is redistributed, either centri- 
petally or centrifugally. The feathers of the common 
guinea-fowl offer a good instance of white spots sur- 
rounded by darker zones ; and wherever the white spots 
are large and stand near each other, the surrounding 



surface of fore-wdng. 

A*. Specimen, from Natal, ditto. 


of hi lid- wing. 

Bb Specimen, from Mauritius, ditto. 


Chap. XIV. 


CaiADATlON OF CHARACTERS. 


655 


dark zones become confluent. In the same wing-feather 
of the Argus pheasant dark spots may be seen sur- 
rounded by a pale zone, and white spots by a dark zone. 
Thus the formation of an ocellus in its most elementary 
state appears to be a simple affair. By what further 
steps the more complex ocelli, which are surrounded by 
many successive zones of colour, have been generated, 
I will not pretend to say. But the zoned feathers of 
the mongrels from differently coloured fowls, and the 
extraordinary variability of the ocelli on many Lepido- 
i:)iera, lead us to conclude that their formation is not a 
complex process, but depends on some slight and gradu- 
ated change in the nature of the adjoining tissues. 

Gradation of Secondary Sexual Characters , — Cases of 
gradation are important, as shewing us that highly 
complex ornaments may be acquired by small successive 
steps. In order to discover the actual steps by which 
the male of any existing bird has acquired his magni- 
ficent colours or other ornaments, we ought to behold 
the long line of his extinct progenitors; but this is 
obviously impossible. We may, however, generally 
gain a clue by comparing all the species of the same 
group, if it be a large one ; for some of them will pro- 
bably retain, at least partially, traces of their former 
characters. Instead of entering on tedious details 
respecting various groups, in which striking instances 
of gradation could be given, it seems the best plan to 
take one or two strongly marked cases, for instance that 
of the peacock, in order to see if light can be thrown 
on the steps by which this bird has become so splendidly 
decorated. The peacock is chiefly remarkable from 
the extraordinary length of his tail-coverts; the tail 
itself not being much elongated. The barbs along 


656 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 11. 


nearly the whole length of these feathers stand separate 
or are decomposed ; hut this is the case with the feathers 
of many species, and with some varieties of the domestic 
fowl and pigeon. The barbs coalesce towards the ex- 
tremity of the shaft forming the oval disc or ocellus, 
which is certainly one of the most beautiful objects in 
the world. It consists of an iridescent, intensely blue, 
indented centre, surrounded by a rich green zone, this 
by a broad coppery-brown zone, and this by five other 
narrow zones of slightly different iridescent shades. A 
trifling character in the disc deserves notice ; the barbs, 
for a space along one of the concentric zones are more 
or less destitute of their barbules, so that a part of the 
disc is surrounded by an almost transparent zone, which 
gives it a highly finished aspect. But I have elsewhere 
described an exactly analogous variation in the hackles 
of a sub- variety of the game-cock, in which the tips, 
having a metallic lustre, “ are separated from the lower 
“ part of the feather by a symmetrically shaped trans- 
“ parent zone, composed of the naked portions of the 
“ barbs.” The lower margin or base of the dark-blue 
centre of the ocellus is deeply indented on the line of 
the shaft. The surrounding zones likewise shew traces, 
as may be seen in the drawing (fig. 54), of indentations, 
or rather breaks. These indentations are common to 
the Indian and Javan peacocks {Pavo eristatus and P. 
muticus ) ; and they seem to deserve particular attention, 
as probably connected with the development of the 
ocellus; but for a long time I could not conjecture 
their meaning. 

If we admit the principle of gradual evolution, there 

‘ Variation of Animlas and Plants under Domestication,’ voL i 
p. 254. 


CuAP. XIV. 


GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 


657 


must formerly have existed many species which pre- 
sented every successive step between the wonderfully 
elongated tail-coverts of the peacock and the short tail- 
coverts of all ordinary birds ; and again between the 
magnificent ocelli of the former, and the simpler ocelli 



Fi(?. 64. Feather of Peacock, about two-thirds of natural size, drawn by Mr. Ford. 
The transparent zone is represented by the outermost white zone, confined to the 
upper end of the disc. 


or mere coloured spots on other birds ; and so with all 
the other characters of the peacock. Let us look to 
the allied Gallinaceae for any still-existing gradations. 
The species and sub-species of Polyplectron inhabit 
countries adjacent to the native land of the peacock ; 

2 u 


658 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pat?t II. 


and they so far resemble this bird that they are some- 
times called peacock-pheasants. I am also informed by 
Mr. Bartlett that they resemble the peacock in their 
voice and in some of their habits. During the spring 
the males, as previously described, strut about before 
the comparatively plain-coloured females, expanding and 
erecting their tail and wing-feathers, which are orna- 
mented with numerous ocelli. I request the reader to 
turn back to the drawing (fig. 51, p. 98) of a Poly- 
plectron. In P. na^oleonis the ocelli are confined to 
the tail, and the hack is of a rich metallic blue ; in 
which respects this species approaches the Java peacock. 
P. hardwickii possesses a peculiar top-knot, which is 
also somewhat like that of the Java peacock. In all 
the species the ocelli on the wings and tail are either 
circular or oval, and consist of a beautiful, iridescent, 
greenish-blue or greenish-purple disc, with a black 
border. This border in P. chinquis shades into brown, 
edged with cream colour, so that the ocellus is here sur- 
rounded with variously shaded, though not bright, con- 
centric zones. The unusual length of the tail-coverts 
is another remarkable character in Polyplectron ; for 
in some of the species they are half, and in others 
two- thirds as long as the true tail-feathers. The tail- 
coverts are ocellated as in the peacock. Thus the several 
species of Polyplectron manifestly make a graduated 
approach to the peacock in the length of their tail- 
coverts, in the zoning of the ocelli, and in some other 
characters. 

Notwithstanding this approach, the first species of 
Polyplectron which I examined almost made me give 
up the search ; for I found not only that the true tail- 
feathers, which in the peacock are quite plain, were 


Chap. XIV. BIEDS— GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 659 


ornamented with ocelli, but that the ocelli on all the 
feathers differed fundamentally from those of the pea- 
cock, in there being two on 
the same feather (fig. 55), one 
on each side of the shaft. 

Hence I concluded that the 
early progenitors of the pea- 
cock could not have resembled 
a Polyplectron. But on con- 
tinuing my search, I observed 
that in some of the species 
the two ocelli stood very near 
each other ; that in the tail- 
feathers of P. hardwichii they 
touched each other ; and, 
finally that on the tail-coverts 
of this same species as well as 
of P. malaccense (fig. 56) they 
were actually confluent. As the 
central part alone is confluent, 
an indentation is left at both 
the upper and lower ends; 
and the surrounding coloured 
zones are likewise indented. 

A single ocellus is thus formed 
on each tail-covert, though 
still plainly betraying its 
double origin. These con- 
fluent ocelli differ from the 
single ocelli of the peacock in 
having an indentation at both 
ends, instead of only at the 
lower or basal end. The explanation, however, of 



Fig. 55, 


Part of a tail-covert of Poly- 
plectron chinquis, with the two ocelli 
of nat. size. 



. Part of a tail-covert of Poly- 
plectron malaccense, with the two 
ocelli, partially confluent, of nat. size. 


660 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


this difference is not difficult ; in some species of 
Polyplectron the two oval ocelli on the same feather 
stand parallel to each other ; in other species (as in 
P. chinquis) they converge towards one end ; now 
the partial confluence of two convergent ocelli would 
manifestly leave a much deeper indentation at the 
divergent than at the convergent end. It is also mani- 
fest that if the convergence were strongly pronounced 
and the confluence complete, the indentation at the 
convergent end would tend to disappear. 

The tail-feathers in both species of the peacock are 
entirely destitute of ocelli, and this apparently is related 
to their being covered up and concealed by the long 
tail-coverts. In this respect they difier remarkably 
from the tail-feathers of Polyplectron, which in most of 
the species are ornamented with larger ocelli than 
those on the tail-coverts. Hence I was led carefulh 
to examine the tail-feathers of the several species, in 
order to discover whether their ocelli shewed any ten- 
dency to disappear ; and to my great satisfaction, 
this appeared to be so. The central tail-feathers of 
P. napoleonis have the two ocelli on each side of the shaft 
perfectly developed; but the inner ocellus becomes 
less and less conspicuous on the more exterior tail- 
feathers, until a mere shadow or rudiment is left on 
the inner side of the outermost feather. Again, in 
P. malaccense, the ocelli on the tail-coverts are, as we 
have seen, confluent ; and these feathers are of unusual 
length, being two-thirds of the length of the tail- 
feathers, so that in both these respects they approach 
the tail-coverts of the peacock. Now in P. malaccense 
the two central tail-feathers alone are ornamented, 
each with two brightly-coloured ocelli, the inner ocellus 


Chap. XIV. BIRDS — GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 661 

having completely disappeared from all the other tail- 
feathers. Consequently the tail-coverts and tail- 
feathers of this species of Polyplectron make a near 
approach in structure and ornamentation to the corres- 
ponding feathers of the peacock. 

As far, then, as gradation throws light on the steps 
by which the magnificent train of the peacock has been 
acquired, hardly anything more is needed. If we 
picture to ourselves a progenitor of the peacock in an 
almost exactly intermediate condition between the exist- 
ing peacock, with his enormously elongated tail-coverts, 
ornamented with single ocelli, and an ordinary gallina- 
ceous bird with short tail-coverts, merely spotted with 
some colour, we shall see a bird allied to Polyplectron 
— that is, with tail-coverts, capable of erection and ex- 
pansion, ornamented with two partially confluent ocelli, 
and long enough almost to conceal the tail-feathers, 
the latter having already partially lost their ocelli. 
The indentation of the central disc and of the surround- 
ing zones of the ocellus, in both species of peacock, 
speaks plainly in favour of this view, and is otherwise 
inexplicable. The males of Polyplectron are no doubt 
beautiful birds, but their beauty, when viewed from a 
little distance, cannot be compared with that of the 
peacock. Many female progenitors of the peacock must, 
during a long line of descent, have appreciated this 
superiority ; for they have unconsciously, by the con- 
tinued preference of the most beautiful males, rendered 
the peacock the most splendid of living birds. 

Argus pheasant , — Another excellent case for investi- 
gation is offered by the ocelli on the wing-feathers of 
the Argus pheasant, which are shaded in so wonderful 


662 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


a maimer as to resemble balls lying loose within 
sockets, and consequently differ from ordinary ocelli. 
No one, I presume, will attribute the shading, which 
has excited the admiration of many experienced artists, 
to chance — to the fortuitous concourse of atoms of 
colouring matter. That these ornaments should have 
been formed through the selection of many successive 
variations, not one of which was originally intended to 
produce the ball-and-socket effect, seems as incredible 
as that one of Eaphael’s Madonnas should have been 
formed by the selection of chance daubs of paint made 
by a long succession of young artists, not one of whom 
intended at first to draw the human figure. In order 
to discover how the ocelli have been developed, we can- 
not look to a long line of progenitors, nor to many 
closely-allied forms, for such do not now exist. But 
fortunately the several feathers on the wing suffice to 
give us a clue to the problem, and they prove to de- 
monstration that a gradation is at least possible from a 
mere spot to a finished ball-and-socket ocellus. 

The wing-feathers, bearing the ocelli, are covered 
with dark stripes (fig. 57) or with rows of dark spots 
(fig. 59), each stripe or row of spots running obliquely 
down the outer side of the shaft to one of the ocelli. 
The spots are generally elongated in a line transverse 
to the row in which they stand. They often become 
confluent either in the line of the row — and then they 
form a longitudinal stripe — or transversely, that is, 
with the spots in the adjoining rows, and then they 
form transverse stripes. A spot sometimes breaks up into 
smaller spots, which still stand in their proper places. 

It will be convenient first to describe a perfect ball- 
and-socket ocellus. This consists of an intensely black 


Chap. XIV. BIRDS— GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 663 



circular ring, surrounding a space shaded so as exactly 
to resemble a ball. Tbe figure bere given bas been 
admirably drawn by Mr. Ford and well engraved, but 
a woodcut cannot exbibit tbe exquisite shading of tbe 
original. Tbe ring 
is almost always 
slightly broken or 
interrupted (see fig. 

57) at a point in the 
upper half, a little 
to tbe right of and 
above tbe wbitesbade 
on tbe enclosed ball ; 
it is also sometimes 
broken towards tbe 
base on tbe right 
band. These little 
breaks have an im- 
portant meaning. 

Tbe ring is always 
much thickened, with 
tbe edges ill-defined 
towards tbeleft-band 
upper corner, tbe 
feather being held 
erect, in tbe position 

. , . , . . , Fig. 67. Part of secondary wing-feather of Argua 

in wnicn it is nere pheasant, shewing two perfect ocelli, a and 6. 

A, B, C, D, &c., are dark stripes nmning obliquely 
drawn. bJeneath this down, each to an ocellus. 

flnVlronorl r^nvf flioro [Much of the web on both sides, especially to the 
tniCKenea pai t toere lett ©f the shaft, has been cut off.] 

is on tbe surface of 

tbe ball an oblique almost pure- white mark, which shades 
ofi* downwards into a pale-leaden hue, and this into 
yellowish and brown tints, which insensibly become 


664 THE UESCP:NT of man. 1’art II. 

darker and darker towards the lower part of the hall. 
It is this shading which gives so admirably the effect of 
light shining on a convex surface. If one of the balls 
be examined, it will be seen that the lower part is of a 
brown tint and is indistinctly separated by a curved 
oblique line from the upper part, which is yellower and 
more leaden ; this curved oblique line runs at right 
angles to the longer axis of the white patch of light, 
and indeed of all the shading; but this difference in 
colour, which cannot of course be shewn in the woodcut, 
does not in the least interfere with the perfect shading 

of the ball. It should 
be particularly observed 
that each ocellus stands in 
obvious connection either 
with a dark stripe, or with 
a longitudinal row of dark 
spots, for both occur in- 
differently on the same 
feather. Thus in fig. 57 
stripe A runs to ocellus a ; 
Bruns to ocellus h; stripe C 
istroken intheupperpart, 
and runs down to the next 
succeeding ocellus, not re- 
presented in the woodcut ; 
D to the next lower one, 
and so with the stripes E 
andF. Lastly, the several 
ocelli are separated from 
each other byapale surfacebearing irregular blackmarks. 

I will next describe the other extreme of the series, 
namely, the first trace of an ocellus. The short secon- 



Chap. XIV. lURDS — GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 665 

dary wing-feather (fig. 58), nearest to the body, is 
marked like the other feathers, with oblique, longitu- 
dinal, rather irregular, rows of very dark spots. The 
basal spot, or that nearest the shaft, in the five lower 
rows (excluding the lowest one) is a little larger than 
the other spots of the same row, and a little more 
elongated in a transverse direction. It differs also 
from the other spots by being bordered on its upper 



I ig. 69. Portion of one of the secondary wii.g-feathers near to the body, shewing the 
so-called elliptic ornaments. The right-hand figure is given merely as a di.agram 
for the sake of the letters of reference. 


A, B, C, D, &c. Rows of spots running 
down to and forming the elliptic 
ornaments. 

b. Lowest spot or mark in row B. 


c. The next succeeding spot or mark in 

the same row. 

d. Apparently a broken ^prolongation of 

the spot c. in the same row B. 


side with some dull fulvous shading. But this spot 
is not in any way more remarkable than those on the 
plumage of many birds, and might easily be overlooked. 
The next higher spot does not differ at all from the upper 


666 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part TT. 


ones in the same row. The larger basal spots occupy 
exactly the same relative position on these feathers as 
do the perfect ocelli on the longer wing-feathers. 

By looking to the next two or three succeeding 
wing-feathers, an absolutely insensible gradation can 
be traced from one of the last-described basal spots, 
together with the next higher one in the same row, to 
a curious ornament, which cannot be called an ocellus, 
and which I will name, from the want of a better 
term, an “ elliptic ornament.” These are shewn in the 
accompanying figure (fig. 59). We here see several 
oblique rows. A, B, C, D, &c. (see the lettered diagram 
on the right hand), of dark spots of the usual character. 
Each row of spots runs down to and is connected with 
one of the elliptic ornaments, in exactly the same 
manner as each stripe in fig. 57 runs down to, and is 
connected with, one of the ball-and-socket ocelli. Look- 
ing to any one row, for instance, B, in fig. 59, the 
lowest mark (b) is thicker and considerably longer than 
the upper spots, and has its left extremity pointed and 
curved upwards. This black mark is abruptly bordered 
on its upper side by a rather broad space of richly 
shaded tints, beginning with a narrow brown zone, 
which passes into orange, and this into a pale leaden 
tint, with the end towards the shaft much paler. These 
shaded tints together fill up the whole inner space of 
the elliptic ornament. The mark (h) corresponds in 
every respect with the basal shaded spot of the simple 
feather described in the last paragraph (fig. 58), but 
is more highly developed and more brightly coloured. 
Above and to the right of this spot (b fig. 59), with its 
bright shading, there is a long narrow, black mark (c), 
belonging to the same row, and which is arched a little 


Cnxr. XIV. BIRDS— GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 667 

downwards so as to face (h). This mark is sometimes 
broken into two portions. It is also narrowly edged 
on the lower side with a fulvous tint. To the left of and 
above c, in the same oblique direction, but always more 
or less distinct from it, there is another black mark 
(d). This mark is generally sub-triangular and irre- 
gular in shape, but in the one lettered in the diagram 
it is unusually narrow, elongated, and regular. It 
apparently consists of a lateral and broken prolonga- 
tion of the mark (c), together with its confluence with 
a broken and prolonged part of the next spot above ; 
but I do not feel sure of this. These three marks, h, 
c, and dy with the intervening bright shades, form to- 
gether the so-called elliptic ornament. These orna- 
ments placed parallel to the shaft, manifestly corre- 
spond in position with the ball-and-socket ocelli. Their 
extremely elegant appearance cannot be appreciated in 
the drawing, as the orange and leaden tints, contrast- 
ing so well with the black marks, cannot be shewn. 

Between one of the elliptic ornaments and a perfect 
ball-and-socket ocellus, the gradation is so perfect that 
it is scarcely possible to decide when the latter term 
ought to be used. The passage from the one into the 
other is effected by the elongation and greater curva- 
ture in opposite directions of the lower black mark (h 
fig. 59), and more especially of the upper one (c), to- 
gether with the contraction of the elongated sub-tri- 
angular or narrow mark (d), so that at last these three 
marks become confluent, forming an irregular elliptic 
ring. This ring is gradually rendered more and more 
circular and regular, increasing at the same time in 
diameter. I have here given a drawing (fig. 60) of the 
natural size of an ocellus not as yet quite perfect. 


668 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


The lower part of the black ring is much more curved 
than is the lower mark in the elliptic ornament (b fig. 
59). The upper part of the ring consists of two or 
three separate portions ; and there is only a trace of 

the thickening of the portion 
which forms the black mark 
above the white shade. This 
white shade itself is not as yet 
much concentrated ; and be- 
neath it the surface is brighter 
coloured than in a perfect ball- 
and-socket ocellus. Even in 
the most perfect ocelli traces 
of the junction of three or four 
elongatedblack marks, by which 
the ring has been formed, may 
often be detected. The irre- 
gular sub-triangular or narrow 
mark (d fig. 59), manifestly 
forms, by its contraction and 
equalisation, the thickened 
portion of the ring above 
the white shade on a perfect ball-and-socket ocellus. 
The lower part of the ring is invariably a little 
thicker than the other parts (see fig. 57), and this 
follows from the lower black mark of the elliptic 
ornament {b fig. 59) having originally been thicker 
than the upper mark (c). Every step can be followed 
in the process of confluence and modification ; and the 
black ring which surrounds the ball of the ocellus is 
unquestionably formed by the union and modification 
of the three black marks, b, c, d, of the elliptic ornament. 
The irregular zigzag black marks between the succes- 



Fig. CO. An ocellus in an inter- 
mediate condition between the 


Chap. XIV. BIKDS — GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 669 

sive ocelli (see again fig. 57) are plainly due to the 
breaking up of the somewhat more regular but similar 
marks between the elliptic ornaments. 

The successive steps in the shading of the ball-and- 
socket ocelli can be followed out with equal clearness. 
The brown, orange, and pale-leadened narrow zones, 
which border the lower black mark of the elliptic orna- 
ment, can be seen gradually to become more and more 
softened and shaded into each other, with the upper 
lighter part towards the left-hand corner rendered 
still lighter, so as to become almost white, and at the 
same time more contracted. But even in the most 
perfect ball-and-socket ocelli a slight difference in the 
tints, though not in the shading, between the upper 
and lower parts of the ball can be perceived, as before 
noticed ; and the line of separation is oblique, in the same 
direction as the bright coloured shades of the elliptic 
ornaments. Thus almost every minute detail in the 
shape and colouring of the ball-and-socket ocelli can 
be shewn to follow from gradual changes in the elliptic 
ornaments; and the development of the latter can be 
traced by equally small steps from the union of two 
almost simple spots, the lower one (fig. 58) having 
some dull fulvous shading on its upper side. 

The extremities of the longer secondary feathers 
which bear the perfect ball-and-socket ocelli, are 
peculiarly ornamented (fig. 61). The oblique longi- 
tudinal stripes suddenly cease upwards and become 
confused; and above this limit the whole upper end 
of the feather (a) is covered with white dots, surrounded 
by little black rings, standing on a dark ground. The 
oblique stripe belonging to the uppermost ocellus (&) 
is barely represented by a very short irregular black 


670 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 



mark with the usual, curved, transverse base. As this 
stripe is thus abruptly cut off, we can perhaps under- 
stand from what has gone 
before, how it is that the 
upper thickened part of the 
ring is here absent; for, as 
before stated, this thickened 
part apparently stands in 
some relation with a broken 
prolongation from the next 
higher spot. From the ab- 
sence of tlie uj>per and thick- 
ened part of the ring, the 
uppermost ocellus, though 
perfect in all other respects, 
appears as if its top had been 
obliquely sliced off. It would, 
I think, perplex any one, who 
believes that the plumage of 
the Argus pheasant was cre- 
ated as we now see it, to ac- 
count for the imperfect condi- 
tion of the uppermost ocellus. 
I should add that on the 
secondary wing-feather far- 
thest from the body all the 
ocelli are smaller and less 
perfect than on the other 
feathers, and have the upper 
part of the ring deficient, as in the case just mentioned. 
The imperfection here seems to be connected with 
the fact that the spots on this feather shew less 
tendency than usual to become confluent into stripes ; 


Fig. 61. Portion near summit of one of 
the secondary wing-feathers, bearing 
perfect ball-and-socket ocelli. 

a. Ornamented upper part. 

b. Uppermost, imperfect ball-and-socket 

ocellus. (The shading above the 
white mark on the summit of the 
ocellus is here a little too dark.) 

c. Perfect ocellus. 


. Chap. XIV. BIRDS— GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 671 

they are, on the contrary, often broken up into smaller 
spots, so that two or three rows run down to the same 
ocellus. 

There still remains another very curious point, first 
observed by Mr. T. W. Wood,®^ which deserves atten- 
tion. In a photograph, given me by Mr. Ward, of a 
specimen mounted as in the act of display, it may be 
seen that on the 'feathers which are held perpendi- 
cularly, the white marks on the ocelli, representing 
light reflected from a convex surface, are at the upper 
or further end, that is, are directed upwards ; and the 
bird whilst displaying himself on the ground would 
naturally be illuminated from above. But here comes 
the curious point, the outer feathers are held almost 
horizontally, and their ocelli ought likewise to appear 
as if illuminated from above, and consequently the 
white marks ought to be placed on the upper sides of 
the ocelli ; and, wonderful as is the fact, they are thus 
placed ! Hence the ocelli on the several feathers, 
though occupying very different positions with respect 
to the light, all appear as if illuminated from above, 
just as an artist would have shaded them. Neverthe- 
less they are not illuminated from strictly the same 
point as they ought to be; for the white marks on 
the ocelli of the feathers which are held almost 
horizontally, are placed rather too much towards 
the further end ; that is they are not sufficiently 
lateral. We have, however, no right to expect absolute 
perfection in a part rendered ornamental through 
sexual selection, any more than we have in a part 
modified through natural selection for real use; for 
instance, in that wondrous organ the human eye. And 
« The ‘ Field,’ May 28, 1870, 


672 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


we know what Helmholtz, the highest authority in 
Europe on the subject, has said about the human eye; 
that if an optician had sold him an instrument so 
carelessly made, he would have thought himself fully 
justified in returning it.®^ 

We have now seen that a perfect series can he 
followed, from simple spots to the wonderful ball-and- 
socket ornaments. Mr. Gould, who kindly gave me 
some of these feathers, fully agrees with me in the com- 
pleteness of the gradation. It is obvious that the 
stages in development exhibited by the feathers on the 
same bird do not at all necessarily shew us the steps 
passed through by the extinct progenitors of the 
species; hut they probably give us the clue to the 
actual steps, and they at least prove to demonstration 
that a gradation is possible. Bearing in mind how 
carefully the male Argus pheasant displays his plumes 
before the female, as well as the many facts rendering 
it probable that female birds prefer the more attractive 
males, no one who admits the agency of sexual selection 
in any case will deny that a simple dark spot with 
some fulvous shading might be converted, through the 
approximation and modification of two adjoining spots, 
together with some slight increase of colour, into one 
of the so-called elliptic ornaments. These latter orna- 
ments have been shewn to many persons, and all have 
admitted that they are beautiful, some thinking them 
even more so than the ball-and-socket ocelli. As the 
secondary plumes became lengthened through sexual 
selection, and as the elliptic ornaments increased in 
diameter, their colours apparently became less bright ; 

* Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects,’ Eng. trans. 1873, pp. 
219, 227, 209, 390, 


Chap. XIV. BLlfDS— GUADATION OF CHARACTERS. 673 


and then the ornamentation of the plumes had to be 
gained by an improvement in the pattern and shading ; 
and this process was carried on until the wonderful 
ball-and-socket ocelli were finally developed. Thus 
we can understand — and in no other way as it seems to 
me — the present condition and origin of the ornaments 
on the wing-feathers of the Argus pheasant. 

From the light afforded by the principle of gradation 
— from what we know of the laws of variation — from 
the changes which have taken place in many of our 
domesticated birds — and, lastly, from the character (as 
we shall hereafter see more clearly) of the immature 
plumage of young birds — we can sometimes indicate, 
with a certain amount of confidence, the probable steps 
by which the males have acquired their brilliant 
pUimage and various ornaments; yet in many cases 
we are involved in complete darkness. Mr. Gould 
several years ago pointed out to me a humming-bird, 
the Urosticte henjamini^ remarkable for the curious 
differences between the sexes. The male, besides a 
splendid gorget, has greenish-black tail-feathers, with 
the four central ones tipped with white ; in the female, 
as with most of the allied species, the three oiUer tail- 
feathers on each side are tipped with white, so that the 
male has the four central, whilst the female has the. six 
exterior feathers ornamented with white tips. What 
makes the case more curious is that, although the 
colouring of the tail differs remarkably in both sexes 
of many kinds of humming-birds, Mr. Gould does not 
know a single species, besides the Urosticte, in which 
the male has the four central feathers tipped with 
white, 


674 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


The Duke of Argyll, in commenting on this case,®^ 
passes oyer sexual selection, and asks, “ What explana- 
“ tion does the law of natural selection give of such 
“ specific varieties as these ? ” He answers “ none * 
“ whatever ; ” and I quite agree with him. But can 
this he so confidently said of sexual selection ? Seeing 
in how many ways the tail-feathers of humming-birds 
differ, why should not the four central feathers have 
varied in this one species alone, so as to have ac- 
quired white tips? The variations may have been 
gradual, or somewhat abrupt as in the case recently 
given of the humming-birds near Bogota, in which 
certain individuals alone have the “ central tail-feathers 
‘‘ tipped with beautiful green.” In the female of the 
Urosticte I noticed extremely minute or rudimental 
white tips to the two outer of the four central black tail- 
feathers ; so that here we have an indication of change 
of some kind in the plumage of this species. If we 
grant the possibility of the central tail-feathers of the 
male varying in whiteness, there is nothing strange in 
such variations having been sexually selected. The 
white tips, together with the small white ear-tuffs, 
certainly add, as the Duke of Argyll admits, to the 
beauty of the male; and whiteness is apparently ap- 
preciated by other birds, as may be inferred from such 
cases as the snow-white male of the Bell-bird. The 
statement made by Sir K. Heron should not he for- 
gotten, namely, that his peahens, when debarred from 
access to the pied peacock, would not unite with any 
other male, and during that season produced no off- 
spring. Nor is it strange that variations in the tail- 
feathers of the Urosticte should have been specially 
“ ‘ The Eeign of Law,’ 1867, p. 247, 


Chap. XIV. BIRDS — GRADATION OF CHARACTERS. 675 


selected for the sake of ornament, for the next succeed- 
ing genus in the family takes its name of Metallura 
from the splendour of these feathers. We have, 
moreover, good evidence that humming-birds take 
especial pains in displaying their tail-feathers; Mr. 
Belt,®^ after describing the beauty of the Florisuga mel- 
livoraj says, “I have seen the female sitting on a 
“branch, and two males displaying their charms in 
“ front of her. One would shoot up like a rocket, then 
“ suddenly expanding the snow-white tail, like an in- 
“ verted parachute, slowly descend in front of her, 
“ turning round gradually to shew off hack and front. 

“ The expanded white tail covered more 

“ space than all the rest of the bird, and was evidently 
“the grand feature in the performance. Whilst one 
“ male was descending, the other would shoot up and 
“ come slowly down expanded. The entertainment 
“ would end in a fight between the two performers ; 
“ hut whether the most beautiful or the most pugna- 
“ cious was the accepted suitor, I know not.” Mr. 
Gould, after describing the peculiar plumage of the 
Urosticte, adds, “ that ornament and variety is the sole 
“ object, I have myself hut little doubt.” If this be 
admitted, we can perceive that the males which during 
former times were decked in the most elegant and novel 
manner would have gained an advanj;age, not in the 
ordinary struggle for life, hut in rivalry with other 
males, and would have left a larger number of offspring 
to inherit their newly-acquired beauty. 

“ ‘The Naturalist in Nicara- ‘Introduction to the Trochi- 

gua,’ 1874, p. 112. Udae,’ 1861, p. 110. 


676 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pakt 11, 


CHAPTEE XY. 

BIRDS — continued. 

Discussion as to why the males alone of some species, and both 
sexes of others, are brightly coloured — On sexually-limited 
inheritance, as applied to various structures and to brightly- 
coloured plumage — Nidification in relation to colour — Loss of 
nuptial plumage during the winter. 

We have in this chapter to consider why the females 
of many birds have not acquired the same ornaments 
as the male ; and, why, on the other hand, both sexes 
of many other birds are equally, or almost equally, 
ornamented ? In the following chapter we shall 
consider the few cases in which the female is more 
conspicuously coloured than the male. 

In my ‘ Origin of Species ’ ^ I briefly suggested that 
the long tail of the peacock would he inconvenient 
and the conspicuous black colour of the male caper- 
cailzie dangerous, to the female during the period of 
incubation : and consequently that the transmission of 
these characters 'from the male to the female offspring 
had been checked through natural selection. I still 
think that this may have occurred in some few 
instances : hut after mature reflection on all the facts 
which I have been able to collect, I am now inclined to 
believe that when the sexes differ, the successive 
variations have generally been from the first limited ia 
^^Pourth edition, 1866, p. 241, 


BIRDS— SEXUALLY LIMITED INHERITANCE. 677 


their transmission to the same sex in which they first 
arose. Since my remarks appeared, the subject of 
sexual coloration has been discussed in some very 
interesting papers by Mr. Wallace,^ who believes that 
in almost all cases the successive variations tended at 
first to he transmitted equally to both sexes ; hut that 
the female was saved, through natural selection, from 
acquiring the conspicuous colours of the male, owing to 
the danger which she would thus have incurred during 
incubation. 

This view necessitates a tedious discussion on a 
difficult point, namely, whether the transmission of a 
character, which is at first inherited by both sexes can 
he subsequently limited in its transmission to one sex 
alone by means of natural selection. We must bear in 
mind, as shewn in the preliminary chapter on sexual 
selection, that characters which are limited in their 
development to one sex are always latent in the other. 
An imaginary illustration will best aid us in seeing the 
difficulty of the case ; we may suppose that a fancier 
wished to make a breed of pigeons, in which the males 
alone should be coloured of a pale blue, whilst the 
females retained their former slaty tint. As with 
pigeons characters of all kinds are usually transmitted 
to both sexes equally, the fancier would have to try to 
convert this latter form of inheritance into sexually- 
limited transmission. All that he could do would be 
to persevere in selecting every male pigeon which was 
in the least degree of a paler blue ; and the natural 
result of this process, if steadily carried on for a 
long time, and if the pale variations were strongly 

* ‘Westminster Review,’ July, 1867. ‘Journal of Travel,’ vol. i. 
1868, p. 73. 


678 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


pabt n. 


inherited or often recurred, would be to make his whole 
stock of a lighter blue. But our fancier would be com- 
pelled to match, generation after generation, his pale 
blue males with slaty females, for he wishes to keep the 
latter of this colour. The result would generally he 
the production either of a mongrel piebald lot, or more 
probably the speedy and complete loss of the pale-blue 
tint ; for the primordial slaty colour would be trans- 
mitted with prepotent force. Supposing, however, that 
some pale blue males and slaty females were produced 
during each successive generation, and were always 
crossed together, then the slaty females would have, if 
I may use the expression, much blue blood in their 
veins, for their fathers, grandfathers, &c., will all have 
been blue birds. Under these circumstances it is 
conceivable (though I know of no distinct facts render- 
ing it probable) that the slaty females might acquire 
so strong a latent tendency to pale-blueness, that they 
would not destroy this colour in their male offspring, 
their female offspring still inheriting the slaty tint. 
If so, the desired end of making a breed with the two 
sexes permanently different in colour might be gained. 

The extreme importance, or rather necessity in the 
above case of the desired character, namely, pale-blue- 
ness, being present though in a latent state in the 
female, so that the male offspring should not be 
deteriorated, will be best appreciated as follows : the 
male of Soemmerring’s pheasant has a tail thirty-seven 
inches in length, whilst that of the female is only 
eight inches ; the tale of the male common pheasant 
is about twenty inches, and that of the female twelve 
inches long. Now if the female Soemmerring pheasant 
with her short tail were crossed with the male common 


BIRDS— SEXUALLY LIMITED INHERITANCE. 679 


pheasant, there can be no doubt that the male hybrid 
offspring would have a much longer tail than that of the 
pure offspring of the common pheasant. On the other 
hand, if the female common pheasant, with a tail much 
longer than that of the female Soemmerring pheasant, 
were crossed with the male of the latter, the male 
hybrid offspring would have a much shorter tail than 
that of the pure offspring of Scemmerring’s pheasant.^ 

Our fancier, in order to make his new breed with the 
males of a pale-blue tint, and the females unchanged, 
would have to continue selecting the males during 
many generations ; and each stage of paleness would 
have to he fixed in the males, and rendered latent in 
the females. The task would be an extremely difficult 
one, and has never been tried, but might possibly 
be successfully carried out. The chief obstacle would 
be the early and complete loss of the pale-blue tint, 
from the necessity of reiterated crosses with the slaty 
female, the latter not having at first any latent tendency 
to produce pale-blue offspring. 

On the other hand, if one or two males were to vary 
ever so slightly in paleness, and the variations were 
from the first limited in their transmission to the male 
sex, the task of making a new breed of the desired kind 
would be easy, for such males would simply have to be 
selected and matched with ordinary females. An 
analogous case has actually occurred, for there are 
breeds of the pigeon in Belgium^ in which the males 

’ Temminck says that the tail for me by Mr. Sclater. For the 
of the female Phasianus Seem- common pheasant, see Macgilli- 
merringii is only six inches long, vray, ‘ Hist. Brit. Birds,’ vol. i. 
‘Planches coloriees,’ vol. V. 1838, pp. 118-121. 
pp. 487 and 488 : the measure- ^ Dr. Chapins, ‘ Le Pigeon 
ments above given were made Voyageur Beige,’ 1865, p. 87. 


680 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 1L 


alone are marked with black striae. So again Mr. 
Tegetmeier has recently shown^ that dragons not rarely 
produce silver-coloured birds, -which are almost always 
hens ; and he himself has bred ten such females. It is 
on the other hand a very unusual event when a silver 
male is produced ; so that nothing would be easier, if 
desired, than to make a breed of dragons with blue 
• males and silver females. This tendency is indeed so 
strong that when Mr. Tegetmeier at last got a silver 
male and matched him with one of the silver females, he 
expected to get a breed with both sexes thus coloured ; 
he was however disappointed, for the young male re- 
verted to the blue colour of his grandfather, the young 
female alone being silver. No doubt with patience this 
tendency to reversion in the males, reared from an occa- 
sional silver male matched with a silver hen, might be 
eliminated, and then both sexes would be coloured alike ; 
and this very process has been followed with success by 
Mr. Esquilant in the case of silver turbits. 

With fowls, variations of colour, limited in their 
transmission to the male sex, habitually occur. When 
this form of inheritance prevails, it might well happen 
that some of the successive variations would be 
transferred to the female, who would then slightly 
resemble the male, as actually occurs in some breeds. 
Or again, the greater number, but not all, of the 
successive steps might be transferred to both sexes, 
and the female would then closely resemble the male. 
There can hardly be a doubt that this is the cause of 
the male pouter pigeon having a somewhat larger crop, 
and of the male carrier pigeon having somewhat larger 
wattles, than their respective females ; for fanciers have 
® The ‘ Field,' Sept. 1872. 


BIRDS — SEXUALLY LIMITED INHERITANCE. 681 


not selected one sex more than the other, and have had no 
wish that these characters should be more strongly- 
displayed in the male than in the female, yet this is the 
case with both breeds. 

The same process would have to be followed, and the 
same difficulties encountered, if it were desired to make 
a breed with the females alone of some new colour. 

Lastly, our fancier might wish to make a breed with 
the two sexes differing from each other, and both from 
the parent species. Here the difficulty would be 
extreme, unless the successive variations were from 
the first sexually limited on both sides, and then there 
would be no difficulty. We see this with the fowl ; 
thus the two sexes of the pencilled Hamburghs differ 
greatly from each other, and from the two sexes of the 
aboriginal Gallus hankiva ; and both are now kept con- 
stant to their standard of excellence by continued selec- 
tion, which would be impossible unless the distinctive 
characters of both were limited in their transmission. 

The Spanish fowl offers a more curious case ; the 
male has an immense comb, but some of the successive 
variations, by the accumulation of which it was acquired, 
appear to have been transferred to the female ; for she 
has a comb many times larger than that of the females 
of the parent species. But the comb of the female 
differs in one respect from that of the male, for it is 
apt to lop over ; and within a recent period it has been 
ordered by the fancy that this should always be the 
case, and success has quickly followed the order. Now 
the lopping of the comb must be sexually limited in its 
transmission, otherwise it would prevent the comb of 
the male from being perfectly upright, which would be 
abhorrent to every fancier. On the other hand, the 


682 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


Part IL 


uprightness of the comb in the male must likewise he 
a sexually-limited character, otherwise it would prevent 
the comb of the female from lopping over. 

From the foregoing illustrations, we see that even 
with almost unlimited time at command, it would he 
an extremely difficult and complex, perhaps an im- 
' possible process, to change one form of transmission 
into the other through selection. Therefore, without 
distinct evidence in each case, I am unwilling to admit 
that this has been effected in natural species. On the 
other hand, by means of successive variations, which 
were from the first sexually limited in their transmission, 
there would not be the least difficulty in rendering a 
male bird widely different in colour or in any other 
character from the female ; the latter being left un- 
altered, or slightly altered, or specially modified for 
the sake of protection. 

As bright colours are of service to the males in their 
rivalry with other males, such colours would be selected 
whether or not they were transmitted exclusively to 
the same sex. Consequently the females might be 
expected often to partake of the brightness of the 
males to a greater or less degree ; and this occurs with 
a host of species. If all the successive variations were 
transmitted equally to both sexes, the females would 
be indistinguishable from the males ; and this likewise 
occurs with many birds. If, however, dull colours 
were of high importance for the safety of the female 
during incubation, as with many ground birds, the 
females which varied in brightness, or which received 
through inheritance from the males any marked 
accession of brightness, would sooner or later be 
destroyed. But the tendency in the males to continue 


BIRDS— SEXUALLY LIMITED INHERITANCE. 683 

for an indefinite period transmitting to their female 
offspring their own brightness, would have to be elimi- 
nated by a change in the form of inheritance; and 
this, as shewn by our previous illustration, would be ex- 
tremely difficult. The more probable result of the long- 
continued destruction of the more brightly-coloured 
females, supposing the equal form of transmission to 
prevail, would be the lessening or annihilation of the 
bright colours of the males, owing to their continual 
crossing with the duller females. It would he tedious 
to follow out all the other possible results ; hut I may 
remind the reader that if sexually-limited variations in 
brightness occurred in the females, even if they were 
not in the least injurious to them and consequently 
were not eliminated, yet they would not he favoured 
or selected, for the male usually accepts any female, 
and does not select the more attractive individuals ; 
consequently these variations would he liable to be lost, 
and would have little influence on the character of the 
race ; and this will aid in accounting for the females 
being commonly duller-coloured than the males. 

In the eighth chapter instances were given, to which 
many might here he added, of variations occurring at 
various ages, and inherited at the corresponding age. 
It was also shewn that variations which occur late in life 
are commonly transmitted to the same sex in which 
they first appear ; whilst variations occurring early in 
life are apt to be transmitted to both sexes ; not that 
all the cases of sexually-limited transmission can thus 
be accounted for. It was further shewn that if a male 
bird varied by becoming brighter whilst young, such 
variations would be of no service until the age for 
reproduction had arrived, and there was competition 


684 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part. II. 


between rival males. But in the case of birds living 
on the ground and commonly in need of the protec- 
tion of dull colours, bright tints would be far more 
dangerous to the young and inexperienced than to the 
adult males. Consequently the males which varied in 
brightness whilst young would suffer much destruction 
and be eliminated through natural selection ; on the 
other hand, the males which varied in this manner 
when nearly mature, notwithstanding that they were 
exposed to some additional danger, might survive, and 
from being favoured through sexual selection, would 
procreate their kind. As a relation often exists 
between the period of variation and the form of trans- 
mission, if the bright-coloured young males were 
destroyed and the mature ones were successful in their 
courtship, the males alone would acquire brilliant 
colours and would transmit them exclusively to their 
male offspring. But I by no means wish to maintain 
that the influence of age on the form of transmission, 
is the sole cause of the great difference in brilliancy 
between the sexes of many birds. 

When the sexes of birds differ in colour, it is in- 
teresting to determine .whether the males alone have 
been modified by sexual selection, the females having 
been left unchanged, or only partially and indirectly 
thus changed ; or whether the females have been 
specially modified through natural selection for the 
sake of protection. I will therefore discuss this ques- 
tion at some length, even more fully than its intrinsic 
importance deserves ; for various curious collateral 
points may thus be conveniently considered. 

Before we enter on the subject of colour, more 
especially in reference to Mr. Wallace’s conclusions, it 


Chap. XV. BIRDS — DEVELOPMENT OF SPURS. 


685 


may be useful to discuss some other sexual differences 
under a similar point of view. A breed of fowls for- 
merly existed in Germany® in which the hens were 
furnished with spurs ; they were good layers, but they 
so greatly disturbed their nests with their spurs that 
they could not be allowed to sit on their own eggs. 
Hence at one time it appeared to me probable that 
with the females of the wild Gallinaceae the develop- 
ment of spurs had been checked through natural selec- 
tion, from the injury thus caused to their nests. This 
seemed all the more probable, as wing-spurs, which 
would not be injurious during incubation, are often as 
well-developed in the female as in the male ; though 
in not a few cases they are rather larger in the male. 
When the male is furnished with leg-spurs the female 
almost always exhibits rudiments of them, — the rudi- 
ment sometimes consisting of a mere scale, as in 
Gallus. Hence it might be argued that the females 
had aboriginally been furnished with well-developed 
spurs, but that these had subsequently been lost 
through disuse or natural selection. But if this view 
be admitted, it would have to be extended to innu- 
merable other cases ; and it implies that the female 
progenitors of the existing spur-bearing species were 
once encumbered with an injurious appendage. 

In some few genera and species, as in Galloperdix, 
Acomus, and the Javan peacock (Pavo muticus), the 
females, as well as the males, possess well-developed 
leg-spurs. Are we to infer from this fact that they 
construct a different sort of nest from that made by their 
nearest allies, and not liable to be injured by their 
spurs ; so that the spurs have not been removed ? Or 
Bechstein, ‘Naturgesch. Deutsch lands,’ 1793, B, iii. s, 339, 


686 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


are we to suppose that the females of these several 
species especially require spurs for their defence ? It 
is a more probable conclusion that both the presence 
and absence of spurs in the females result from differ- 
ent laws of inheritance having prevailed, independently 
of natural selection. With the many females in which 
' spurs appear as rudiments, we may conclude that some 
few of the successive variations, through which they 
were developed in the males, occurred very early in 
life, and were consequently transferred to the females. 
In the other and much rarer cases, in which the 
females possess fully developed spurs, we may conclude 
that all the successive variations were transferred to 
them ; and that they gradually acquired and inherited 
the habit of not disturbing their nests. 

The vocal organs and the feathers variously modified 
for producing sound, as well as the proper instincts for 
using them, often differ in the two sexes, but are some- 
times the same in both. Can such differences be ac- 
counted for by the males having acquired these organs 
and instincts, whilst the females have been saved from 
inheriting them, on account of the danger to which they 
would have been exposed by attracting the attention of 
birds or beasts of prey ? This does not seem to me 
probable, when we think of the multitude of birds 
which with impunity gladden the country with their 
voices during the spring."^ It is a safer conclusion that, 
as vocal and instrumental organs are of special service 
only to the males during their courtship, these organs 

Daines Barrington, however, to them during incubation. He 
thought it probable (‘ Phil. adds, that a similar view may 

Transact.’ 1773, p. 164) that few possibly account for the inferi- 

female birds sing, because the ority of the female to the male 
talentwouldhave been dangerous in plumage. 


Chap. XV. BIRDS — LENGTH OF FEMALE’S TAIL. 687 

were developed through sexual selection and their con- 
stant use in that sex alone — the successive variations 
and the effects of use having been from the first more 
or less limited in transmission to the male offspring. 

Many analogous cases could be adduced; those for 
instance of the plumes on the head being generally 
longer in the male than in the female, sometimes of 
equal length in both sexes, and occasionally absent in 
the female, — these several cases occurring in the same 
group of birds. It would be difficult to account for 
such a difference between the sexes by the female 
having been benefited by possessing a slightly shorter 
crest than the male, and its consequent diminution or 
complete suppression through natural selection. But 
I will take a more favourable case, namely the length 
of the tail. The long train of the peacock would 
have been not only inconvenient but dangerous to the 
peahen during the period of incubation and whilst 
accompanying her young. Hence there is not the 
least d priori improbability in the development of her 
tail having been checked through natural selection. 
But the females of various pheasants, which apparently 
are exposed on their open nests to as much danger as 
the peahen, have tails of considerable length. The 
females as well as the males of the Menura superha 
have long tails, and they build a domed nest, which is 
a great anomaly in so large a bird. Naturalists have 
wondered how the female Menura could manage her 
tail during incubation ; but it is now known ® that she 
“ enters the nest head first, and then turns round 
“with her tail sometimes over her back, but more 
“ often bent round by her side. Thus in time the tail 
® Mr. Ramsay, in ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1868, p. 50. 


688 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


“ becomes quite askew, and is a tolerable guide to the 
length of time the bird has been sitting,” Both 
sexes of an Australian kingfisher {Tanysiptera sylvia) 
have the middle tail-feathers greatly lengthened, and 
the female makes her nest in a hole ; and as I am 
informed by Mr. E. B. Sharpe these feathers become 
much crumpled during incubation. 

In these two latter cases the great length of the 
tail-feathers must be in some degree inconvenient to 
the female ; and as in both species the tail-feathers 
of the female are somewhat shorter than those of the 
male, it might he argued that their full development 
had been prevented through natural selection. But 
if the development of the tail of the peahen had 
been checked only when it became inconveniently or 
dangerously great, she would have retained a much 
longer tail than she actually possesses ; for her tail is 
not nearly so long, relatively to the size of her body, 
as that of many female pheasants, nor longer than 
that of the female turkey. It must also be borne in 
mind that, in accordance with this view, as soon as the 
tail of the peahen became dangerously long, and its 
development was consequently checked, she would 
have continually reacted on her male progeny, and 
thus have prevented the peacock from acquiring his 
present magnificent train. We may therefore infer 
that the length of the tail in the peacock and its 
shortness in the peahen are the result of the requisite 
variations in the male having been from the first 
transmitted to the male offspring alone. 

We are led to a nearly similar conclusion with 
respect to the length of the tail in the various species 
of pheasants. In the Eared pheasant [Grossoptilon 


Oha?. XV. BIKDS — COLOUR AND NIDIFIOATION. 689 

auritum) the tail is of equal length in both sexes, 
namely, sixteen or seventeen inches ; in the common 
pheasant it is about twenty inches long in the male 
and twelve in the female ; in Soemmerring’s pheasant, 
thirty-seven inches in the male and only eight in the 
female ; and lastly in Eeeve s pheasant it is sometimes 
actually seventy-two inches long in the male and 
sixteen in the female. Thus in the several species, 
the tail of the female differs much in length, irrespec- 
tively of that of the male ; and this can be accounted 
for, as it seems to me, with much more probability, by 
the laws of inheritance, — that is by the successive 
variations having been from the first -more or less 
closely limited in their transmission to the male sex 
than by the agency of natural selection, resulting from 
the length of tail being more or less injurious to the 
females of these several allied species. 

We may now consider Mr. Wallace’s arguments in 
regard to the sexual coloration of birds. He believes 
that the bright tints originally acquired through sexual 
selection by the males would in all, or almost all cases, 
have been transmitted to the females, unless the trans- 
ference had been checked through natural selection. I 
may here remind the reader that various facts opposed 
to this view have already been given under reptiles, 
amphibians, fishes and lepidoptera. Mr. Wallace rests 
his belief chiefly, but not exclusively, as we shall see 
in the next chapter, on the following statement,® that 
when both sexes are coloured in a very conspicuous 
manner, the nest is of such a nature as to conceal the 
sitting bird; but when there is a marked contrast of 

^ ‘Journal of 'rravel,* edited by A. Murray, vol. i. 1868, p. 78. 

2 Y 


690 THE DESCE^^T OF MAN. Fart II. 

colour between tlie sexes, the male being gay and the 
female dull-coloured, the nest is open and exposes the 
sitting bird to view. This coincidence, as far as it 
goes, certainly seems to favour the belief that the 
females which sit on open nests have been specially 
modified for the sake of protection ; but we shall 
presently see that there is another and more probable 
explanation, namely, that conspicuous females have 
acquired the instinct of building domed nests oftener 
than dull-coloured birds. Mr. Wallace admits that 
there are, as might have been expected, some exceptions 
to his two rules, but it is a question whether the excep- 
tions are not so numerous as seriously to invalidate them. 

There is in the first place much truth in the Duke 
of Argyll’s remark that a large domed nest is more 
conspicuous to an enemy, especially to all tree-haunting 
carnivorous animals, than a smaller open nest. Nor 
must we forget that with many birds which build 
open nests, the male sits on the eggs and aids the 
female in feeding the young: this is the case, for 
instance, with Pyranga destiva,^^ one of the most 
splendid birds in the United States, the male being 
vermilion, and the female light brownish-green. Now 
if brilliant colours had been extremely dangerous to 
birds whilst sitting on their open nests, the males in 
these cases would have sufiered greatly. It might, 
however, be of such paramount importance to the 
male to be brilliantly coloured, in order to beat his 
rivals, that this may have more than compensated some 
additional danger. 

Mr. Wallace admits that with the King-crows 

‘ Journal of Travel,’ edited “ Audubon, ‘ Ornithological 
by A. Murray, vol. i.l868, p.281. Biography,’ vol. i. p. 233, 


Chap. XV. BIRDS— COLOUR AND NIDIFICATION. 691 


(Dicrurus), Orioles, and Pittidae, the females are con- 
spicuously coloured, yet build open nests ; but he 
urges that the birds of the first group are highly 
pugnacious and could defend themselves ; that those 
of the second group take extreme care in concealing 
their open nests, but this does not invariably hold 
good ; and that with the birds of the third group the 
females are brightly coloured chiefly on the under 
surface. Besides these cases, pigeons which are some- 
times brightly, and almost always conspicuously 
coloured, and which are notoriously liable to the 
attacks of birds of prey, offer a serious exception to 
the rule, for they almost always build open and 
exposed nests. In another large family, that of the 
humming-birds, all the species build open nests, yet 
with some of the most gorgeous species the sexes are 
alike ; and in the majority, the females, though less 
brilliant than the males, are brightly coloured. Nor 
can it be maintained that all female humming-birds, 
which are brightly coloured, escape detection by their 
tints being green, for some display on their upper 
surfaces red, blue, and other colour s.^^ 

In regard to birds which build in holes or construct 
domed nests, other advantages, as Mr. Wallace remarks, 
besides concealment are gained, such as shelter from 
the rain, greater warmth, and in hot countries protec- 


Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ 
vol. ii. p. 108. Gould’s ‘ Hand- 
book of the Birds of Australia’ 
vol. i. p. 463. 

For instance, the female 
Eupdomena macroura has the 
head and tail dark blue with 
reddish loins ; the female Lamp- 
ornis porphyrurus is blackish- 
green on the upper surface, with 


the lores and sides of the throat 
crimson ; the female Eulampis 
jugularis has the top of the 
head and back green, but the 
loins and the tail are crimson. 
]\Iany other instances of highly 
conspicuous females could be 
given. See Mr. Gould’s magnili- 
ojut work on tliis family. 


692 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


tion from the sun ; so that it is no valid objection to 
his view that many birds having both sexes obscurely 
coloured build concealed nests.^® The female Horn- 
bill {Buceros), for instance, of India and Africa is 
protected during incubation with extraordinary care, 
for she plasters up with her own excrement the orifice 
of the hole in which she sits on her eggs, leaving only 
a small orifice through which the male feeds her ; she 
is thus kept a close prisoner during the whole period 
of incubation ; yet female horn-hills are not more 
conspicuously coloured than many other birds of equal 
size which build open nests. It is a more serious 
objection to Mr. Wallace’s view, as is admitted by him, 
that in some few groups the males are brilliantly 
coloured and the females obscure, and yet the latter 
hatch their eggs in domed nests. This is the case 
with the G-rallinae of Australia, the Superb Warblers 
(Maluridae) of the same country, the Sun-birds (Nec- 
tariniae), and with several of the Australian Honey- 
suckers or Meliphagidae.^^ 

If we look to the birds of England we shall see that 
there is no close and general relation between the 
colours of the female and the nature of the nest which 
is constructed. About forty of our British birds 


Mr. Sal vin noticed ill Guate- 
mala (‘Ibis,’ 1864, p. 375) that 
humming-birds were much more 
unwilling to leave their nests 
during very hot weather, when 
the sun was shining brightly, as 
if their eggs would be thus in- 
jured, than during cool, cloudy, 
or rainy weather. 

I may specify, as instances 
of dull-ccloured birds building 
concealed nests, the species be- 


longing to eight Australian genera 
described in Gould’s ‘ Handbook * 
of the Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. 
pp. 340, 362, 365, 383, 387, 
389, 391, 414. 

Mr. C. Horne, ‘Proc. Zoo- 
log. Soc.’ 1869, p. 243. 

” On the uidification and 
colours of these latter species, 
see Gould’s ‘ Handbook,’ &c., 
vol. i. pp. 504, 527. 


Chap. XV. BIRDS— COLOUR AND NIDIFICATION. 693 


(excluding those of large size which could defend 
themselves) build in holes in banks, rocks, or trees, or 
construct domed nests. If we take the colours of the 
female goldfinch, bullfinch, or blackbird, as a standard 
of the degree of conspicuousness, which is not highly 
dangerous to the sitting female, then out of the above 
forty birds the females of only twelve can be con- 
sidered as conspicuous to a dangerous degree, the 
remaining twenty-eight being inconspicuous.^® Nor is 
there any close relation within the same genus between 
a well-pronounced difference in colour between the 
sexes, and the nature of the nest constructed. Thus 
the male house sparrow (Passer domesticus) differs 
much from the female, the male tree-sparrow (P. 
montanus) hardly at all, and yet both build well- 
concealed nests. The two sexes of the common fly- 
catcher (Muscicapa grisola) can hardly be distinguished, 
whilst the sexes of the pied fly-catcher (M. luctuosa) 
differ considerably, and both species build -in holes or 
conceal their nests. The female blackbird (Turdus 
merula) differs much, the female ring-ouzel (T. torquatus) 
differs less, and the female common thrush (T. musicus) 


“ I have consulted, on this 
subject, Macgillivray’s ‘British 
Birds,’ and though doubts may 
be entertained in some cases in 
regard to the degree of con- 
cealment of the nest, and to 
the degree of conspicuousness 
of the female, yet the follow- 
ing birds, which all lay their 
eggs in holes or in domed 
nests, can hardly be considered, 
by the above standard, as con- 
spicuous : Passer, 2 species ; 

Sturnus, of which the female is 
considerably less brilliant than 


the male; Cinclus; Motallica 
boarula (?) ; Erithacus (?) ; Fru- 
ticola, 2 sp. ; Saxicola ; Ruti- 
cilla, 2 sp. ; Sylvia, 3 sp. ; Parus, 
3 sp. ; Mecistura; Anorthura ; 
Certhia; Sitta; Yunx; Musci- 
capa, 2 sp. ; Hirundo, 3 sp. ; and 
Cypselus. The females of 
the following 12 birds may 
be considered as conspicuous 
according to the same stand- 
ard, viz., Pastor, Motacilla alba, 
Parus major and P. creruleus, 
Upupa, Picus, 4 sp., Coracias, 
Alcedo, and Merops. 


694 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


hardly at all from their respective males ; yet all build 
open nests. On the other hand, the not very dis- 
tantly-allied water-ouzel {Cinclus aquaticus) builds a 
domed nest, and the sexes differ about as much as in 
the ring-ouzel. The black and red grouse {Tetrao 
tetrix and T. scoticus) build open nests in equally well- 
concealed spots, but in the one species the sexes differ 
greatly, and in the other very little. 

Notwithstanding the foregoing objections, I cannot 
doubt, after reading Mr. Wallace’s excellent essay, 
that looking to the birds of the world, a large majority 
of the species in which the females are conspicuously 
coloured (and in this case the males with rare exceptions 
are equally conspicuous), build concealed nests for the 
sake of protection. Mr. Wallace enumerates^® a long 
series of groups in which this rule holds good ; but 
it will suffice here to give, as instances, the more 
familiar groups of kingfishers, toucans, trogons, puff- 
birds (Capitonidse), plantain-eaters (Musophagae), wood- 
peckers, and parrots. Mr. Wallace believes that in 
these groups, as the males gradually acquired through 
sexual selection their brilliant colours, these were 
transferred to the females and were not eliminated 
by natural selection, owing to the protection which 
they already enjoyed from their manner of nidification. 
According to this view, their present manner of nest- 
ing was acquired before their present colours. But it 
seems to me much more probable that in most cases, 
as the females were gradually rendered more and 
more brilliant from partaking of the colours of the 
male, they were gradually led to change their instincts 
(supposing that they originally built open nests), and 
‘Journal of Travel,’ edited by A. Murray, vol. i. p. 78. 


Chap. XV. BIRDS — COLOUR AND NIDIFICATION. 695 


to seek protection by building domed or concealed 
nests. No one who studies, for instance, . Audubon’s 
account of the differences in the nests of the same 
species in the Northern and Southern United States,^” 
will feel any great difficulty in admitting that birds, 
either by a change (in the strict sense of the word) 
of their habits, or through the natural selection of so- 
called spontaneous variations of instinct, might readily 
be led to modify their manner of nesting. 

This way of viewing the relation, as far as it holds 
good, between the bright colours of female birds and 
their manner of nesting, receives some support from 
certain cases occurring in the Sahara Desert. Here, as 
in most other deserts, various birds, and many other 
animals, have had their colours adapted in a wonderful 
manner to the tints of the surrounding surface. 
Nevertheless there are, as I am informed by the Eev. 
Mr. Tristram, some curious exceptions to the rule ; thus 
the male of the Monticola cyanea is conspicuous from 
his bright blue colour, and the female almost equally 
conspicuous from her mottled brown and white plum- 
age ; both sexes of two species of Dromolsea are of a 
lustrous black ; so that these three species are far 
from receiving protection from their colours, yet they 
are able to survive, for they have acquired the habit 
of taking refuge from danger in holes or crevices in 
the rocks. 

With respect to the above groups in which the 
females are conspicuously coloured and build concealed 
nests, it is not necessary to suppose that each separate 

See many statements in birds by Eugenio Bettoni, iu 
the ‘Ornithological Biography.’ the ‘ Atti della Societa Italiami, 
See also some curious observa- vol, xi. 1869, p. 487, 
tions on the nests of Italian 


696 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


species had its nidifying instinct specially modified; 
but only that the early progenitors of each group were 
gradually led to build domed or concealed nests, and 
afterwards transmitted this instinct, together with 
their bright colours, to their modified descendants. 
As far as it can be trusted, the conclusion is interest- 
ing, that sexual selection together with equal or nearly 
equal inheritance by both sexes, have indirectly deter- 
mined the manner of nidification of whole groups of 
birds. 

According to Mr. Wallace, even in the groups in 
which the females, from being protected in domed 
nests during incubation, have not had their bright 
colours eliminated through natural selection, the males 
often differ in a slight, and occasionally in a considerable 
degree, from the females. This is a significant fact, for 
such differences in colour must be accounted for by 
some of the variations in the males having been from 
the first limited in transmission to the same sex ; as it 
can hardly be maintained that these differences, especi- 
ally when very slight, serve as a protection to the 
female. Thus all the species in the splendid group 
of the Trogons build in holes; and Mr. Gould gives 
figures of both sexes of twenty-five species, in all of 
which, with one partial exception, the sexes differ some- 
times slightly, sometimes conspicuously, in colour, — the 
males being always finer than the females, though the 
latter are likewise beautiful. All the species of king- 
fishers build in holes, and with most of the species the 
sexes are equally brilliant, and thus far Mr. Wallace’s 
rule holds good ; but in some of the Australian species 
the colours of the females are rather less vivid than those 

See his ‘ Monograph of the Trogonidse,’ first edition. 


Chap. XV. BIRDS— COLOUR AND NIDIFIOATION. 697 


of the male ; and in one splendidly-coloured species, the 
sexes differ so much that they were at first thought to 
be specifically distinct.^^ Mr. E. B. Sharpe, who has 
especially studied this group, has shewn me some 
American species (Ceryle) in which the breast of the 
male is belted with black. Again, in Carcineutes, the 
difference between the sexes is conspicuous : in the 
male the upper surface is dull-blue banded with black, 
the lower surface being partly fawn-coloured, and there 
is much red about the head ; in the female the upper 
surface is reddish-brown banded with black, and the 
lower surface white with black markings. It is an 
interesting fact, as shewing how the same peculiar 
style of sexual colouring often characterises allied 
forms, that in three species of Dacelo the male differs 
from the female only in the tail being dull-blue banded 
with black, whilst that of the female is brown with 
blackish bars ; so that here the tail differs in colour in 
the two sexes in exactly the same manner as the whole 
upper surface in the two sexes of Carcineutes. 

With parrots, which likewise build in holes, we find 
analogous cases : in most of the species, both sexes are 
brilliantly coloured and indistinguishable, but in not a 
few species the males are coloured rather more vividly 
than the females, or even very differently from them. 
Thus, besides other strongly-marked differences, the 
whole under surface of the male King Lory (Aprosmictus 
scapulatus) is scarlet, whilst the throat and chest of 
the female is green tinged with red : in the Euphema 
splendida there is a similar difference, the face and 
wing coverts moreover of the female being of a paler 

Namely Cyanalcyon. Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. p. 
Gould’s ‘ Handbook to the 133 ; see, also, pp. 130, 136. 


698 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


blue than in the male.^^ In the family of the tits 
{Parinw), which build concealed nests, the female of 
our common blue tomtit {Parus cseruleus), is “much 
*• less brightly coloured ” than the male ; and in the 
magnificent Sultan yellow tit of India the difference is 
greater.^"^ 

Again, in the great group of the woodpeckers,^® the 
sexes are generally nearly alike, but in the Megapicus 
validus all those parts of the head, neck, and breast, 
which are crimson in the male are pale brown in the 
female. As in several woodpeckers the head of the 
male is bright crimson, whilst that of the female is 
plain, it occurred to me that this colour might possibly 
make the female dangerously conspicuous, whenever 
she put her head out of the hole containing her nest, 
and consequently dhat this colour, in accordance with 
Mr. Wallace’s belief, had been eliminated. This view 
is strengthened by what Malherbe states with respect 
to Indopicus carlotta ; namely, that the young females, 
like the young males, have some crimson about their 
heads, but that this colour disappears in the adult 
female, whilst it is intensified in the adult male. 
Nevertheless the following considerations render this 
view extremely doubtful : the male takes a fair share 
in incubation,'^® and would be thus almost equally 
exposed to danger ; both sexes of many species have 
their heads of an equally bright crimson ; in other 

Every gradation of difter- All the following facts are 

ence between the sexes may be taken from M. Malherbe’s mag- 
followed in the parrots of Aus- nificent ‘ Monographic des Pici- 
tralia. See Gould’s ‘ Hand- ddes,’ 1861. 
book,’ &c., vol. ii. pp. 14-102. Audubon’s ‘Ornithological 

Macgillivray’s ‘ British Biography,’ vol. ii. p. 75 ; see 
Birds,’ vol. ii. p. 433. Jerdon, also the ‘ Ibi.s,’ vol. i. p. 268. 

‘ Birds of India/ vol. ii. p. 282. 


Chap. XV. BIRDS — COLOUR AND NIDIFICATION. 699 


species the difference between the sexes in the amount 
of scarlet is so slight that it can hardly make any 
appreciable difference in the danger incurred ; and 
lastly, the colouring of the head in the two sexes often 
differs slightly in other ways. 

The cases, as yet given, of slight and graduated 
differences in colour between the males and females 
in the groups, in which as a general rule the sexes 
resemble each other, all relate to species which build 
domed or concealed nests. But similar gradations may 
likewise be observed in groups in which the sexes as a 
general rule reseuible each other, but which build open 
nests. 

As I have before instanced the Australian parrots, 
so I may here instance, without giving any details, 
the Australian pigeons.^’ It deserves especial notice 
that in all these cases the slight differences in 
plumage between the sexes are of the same general 
nature as the occasionally greater differences. A good 
illustration of this fact has already been afforded by 
those kingfishers in which either the tail alone or 
the whole upper surface of the plumage differs in the 
same manner in the two sexes. Similar cases may be 
observed with parrots and pigeons. The differences 
in colour between the sexes of the same species are, 
also, of the same general nature as the differences in 
colour between the distinct species of the same group. 
For when in a group in which the sexes are usually 
alike, the male differs considerably from the female, he 
is not coloured in a quite new style. Hence we may 
infer that within the same group the special colours 

” Grould’s * Handbook to the Birds of Australia,’ vol. ii. pp. 
109-149. 


700 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


of both sexes when they are alike, and the colours 
of the male, when he differs slightly or even consider- 
ably from the female, have been in most cases deter- 
mined by the same general cause; this being sexual 
selection. 

It is not probable, as has already been remarked, 
that differences in colour between the sexes, when very 
slight, can be of service to the female as a protection. 
Assuming, however, that they are of service, they might 
be thought to be cases of transition ; but we have no 
reason to believe that many species at any one time are 
undergoing change. Therefore we can hardly admit 
that the numerous females which differ very slightly 
in colour from their males are now all commencing to 
become obscure for the sake of protection. Even if we 
consider somewhat more marked sexual differences, is 
it probable, for instance, that the head of the female 
chaffinch, — the crimson on the hreast of the female 
bullfinch, — the green of the female greenfinch, — the 
crest of the female golden-crested wren, have all been 
rendered less bright by the slow process of selection 
for the sake of protection? I cannot think so; and 
still less with the slight differences between the 
sexes of those birds which build concealed nests. On 
the other hand, the differences in colour between the 
sexes, whether great or small, may to a large extent 
be explained on the principle of the successive varia- 
tions, acquired by the males through sexual selection, 
having been from the first more or less limited in 
their transmission to the females. That the degree 
of limitation should differ in different species of the 
same group will not surprise any one who has studied 
the laws of inheritance, for they are so complex that 


Ohap. XV. BIRDS — COLOUR AND NIDIFIOATION. 701 


they appear to us in our ignorance to be capricious in 
their action.^® 

As far as I can discover there are few large groups 
of birds in which all the species have both sexes alike 
and brilliantly coloured, but I hear from Mr. Sclater, 
that this appears to be the case with the Musophagae 
or plantain-eaters. Nor do I believe that any large 
group exists in which the sexes of all the species are 
widely dissimilar in colour : Mr. Wallace informs me 
that the chatterers of S. America {Gotingidse) offer one 
of the best instances ; but with some of the species, in 
which the male has a splendid red breast, the female 
exhibits some red on her breast ; and the females of 
other species shew traces of the green and other colours 
of the males. Nevertheless we have a near approach 
to close sexual similarity or dissimilarity throughout 
several groups : and this, from what has just been said 
of the fluctuating nature of inheritance, is a somewhat 
surprising circumstance. But that the same laws 
should largely prevail with allied animals is not sur- 
prising. The domestic fowl has produced a great 
number of breeds and sub-breeds, and in these the 
sexes generally differ in plumage ; so that it has been 
noticed as an unusual circumstance when in certain 
sub-breeds they resemble each other. On the other 
hand, the domestic pigeon has likewise produced a vast 
number of distinct breeds and sub-breeds, and in these, 
with rare exceptions, the two sexes are identically 
alike. 

Therefore if other species of Gallus and Columba were 
domesticated and varied, it would not be rash to pre- 

See remarks to this effect in my work on ‘ Variation under 
Domesticatiou,’ vol. ii. chap. xii. 


702 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


diet that similar rules of sexual similarity and dissimi- 
larity, dej)ending on the form of transmission, would 
hold good in both cases. In like manner the same form 
of transmission has generally prevailed under nature 
throughout the same groups, although marked excep- 
tions to this rule occur. Thus within the same family 
or even genus, the sexes may he identically alike, or 
very different in colour. Instances have already been 
given in the same genus, as with sparrows, fly-catchers, 
thrushes and grouse. In the family of pheasants the 
sexes of almost all the species are wonderfully dissimilar, 
but are quite alike in the eared pheasant or Crossop- 
tilon auritum. In two species of Chloephaga, a genus 
of geese, the male cannot be distinguished from the 
females, except by size ; whilst in two others, the sexes 
are so unlike that they might easily be mistaken for 
distinct species.^® 

The laws of inheritance can alone account for the 
following cases, in which the female acquires, late in 
life, certain characters proper to the male, and ulti- 
mately comes to resemble him more or less completely. 
Here protection can hardly have come into play. Mr. 
Bly th informs me that the females of Oriolus melano ■ 
cephaliis and of some allied species, when sufficiently 
mature to breed, differ considerably in plumage from 
the adult males ; but after the second or third moults 
they differ only in their beaks having a slight greenish 
tinge. In the dwarf bitterns (Ardetta), according to 
the same authority, “ the male acquires his final livery 
“ at the first moult, the female not before the third 
or fourth moult ; in the meanwhile she presents an 
intermediate garb, which is ultimately exchanged 

2^ The ‘ Ibis,’ vol. vi. 1864, p. 122. 


Chai'. XV. BIRDS— COLOUR AND NIDIFICATION. 70)^> 

“ for the same livery as that of the male.” So again 
the female Falco feregrinus acquires her blue plumage 
more slowly than the male. Mr. Swinhoe states that 
with one of the Drongo shrikes (Dicrurus macrocercus) 
the male whilst almost a nestling, molts his soft brown 
plumage and becomes of a uniform glossy greenish - 
black ; hut the female retains for a long time the white 
striae and spots on the axillary feathers ; and does not 
completely assume the uniform black colour of the male 
for three years. The same excellent observer remarks 
that in the spring of the second year the female spoon- 
bill (Platalea) of China resembles the male of the first 
year, and that apparently it is not until the third 
spring that she acquires the same adult plumage as 
that possessed by the male at a much earlier age. The 
female Bomhycilla carolinensis differs very little from 
the male, but the appendages, which like beads of 
red sealing-wax ornament the wing-feathers,^® are not 
developed in her so early in life as in the male. In 
the male of an Indian parrakeet {Palmornis javanieus) 
the upper mandible is coral-red from his earliest youth, 
but in the female, as Mr. Blyth has observed with 
caged and wild birds, it is at first black and does not 
become red until the bird is at least a year old, at 
which age the sexes resemble each other in all respects. 
Both sexes of the wild turkey are ultimately furnished 
^Yith a tuft of bristles on the breast, but in two-year- 
old birds the tuft is about four inches long in the male 
and hardly apparent in the female ; when, however, the 

^ Wlien the male courts the stretched wings: A. Leith Adams, 
female, these ornaments are vi- ‘ Field and Forest Rambles,’ 
brated, and “are shewn off to 1873, p. 153. 

“ great advantage,” on the out- 


704 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut II. 


latter has reached her fourth year, it is from four to 
five inches in length.^^ 

These cases must not be confounded with those where 
diseased or old females abnormally assume masculine 
characters, nor with those where fertile females, whilst 
young, acquire the characters of the male, through 
variation or some unknown cause.^^ But all these cases 
have so much in common that they depend, according 
to the hypothesis of pangenesis, on gemmules derived 
from each part of the male being present, though latent, 
in the female; their development following on some 
slight change in the elective affinities of her constituent 
tissues. 


A few words must be added on changes of plumage in 
relation to the season of the year. From reasons 
formerly assigned there can be little doubt that the 
elegant plumes, long pendant feathers, crests, &c., of 
egrets, herons, and many other birds, which are de- 
veloped and retained only during the summer, serve 
for ornamental and nuptial purposes, though common to 
both sexes. The female is thus rendered more con- 


On Ardetta, Translation of 
Cuvier’s ‘ R^gne Animal,’ by- 
Mr. Blyth, footnote, p. 159. 
On the Peregrine Falcon, Mr. 
Blyth, in Charleswortli’s ‘ Mag. 
of Nat. Hist.’ vol. i. 1837, p. 
304:. On Dicrurus, ‘ Ibis,’ 1863, 
p. 44. On the Piatalea, ‘ Ibis,’ 
vol. vi. 1864, p. 366. On the 
Bombycilla, Audubon’s ‘ Orni- 
tholog. Biography,’ vol. i. p. 229. 
On the Palaiornis, see, also, 
Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ vol. i. 
p. 263. On the wild turkey, 
Audubon, ibid. vol. i. p. 15 ; but 
I hear from Judge Caton that in 


Illinois the female very rarely 
acquires a tuft. Analogous 
cases with the females of Petro- 
ocssyphus are given by Mr. R. 

Sharpe, ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 
1872, p. 496. 

Of these latter cases Mr. 
Blyth has recorded (Translation 
of Cuvier’s ‘ Rfegne Animal,’ p. 
158) various instances with 
Lanius, Ruticilla, Linaria, and 
Anas. Audubon has also re- 
corded a similar case (‘ Ornith. 
Biog.’ vol. V. p. 519) with 
Fyranga oasHva. 


Chap. XV. BIRDS—COLOUE AND NIDIFICATION. 705 


spioiious during the period of incubation than during 
the winter ; but such birds as herons and egrets would 
he able to defend themselves. As, however, plumes 
would probably he inconvenient and certainly of no use 
during the winter, it is possible that the habit of 
moulting twice in the year may have been gradually 
acquired through natural selection for the sake of 
casting off inconvenient ornaments during the winter. 
But this view cannot be extended to the many waders, 
whose summer and winter plumages differ very little in 
colour. With defenceless species, in which both sexes, 
or the males alone, become extremely conspicuous 
during the breeding season, — or when the males acquire 
at this season such long wing or tail-feathers as to 
impede their flight, as with Oosmetornis and Vidua, — it 
certainly at first appears highly probable that the 
second moult has been gained for the special purpose 
of throwing off these ornaments. We must, however, 
remember that many birds, such as some of the Birds of 
Paradise, the Argus pheasant and peacock, do not cast 
their plumes during the winter ; and it can hardly be 
maintained that the constitution of these birds, at least 
of the G-allinaceae, renders a double moult impossible, 
for the ptarmigan moults thrice in the year.^^ Hence 
it must be considered as doubtful whether the many 
species which moult their ornamental plumes or lose 
their bright colours during the winter, have acquired 
this habit on account of the inconvenience or danger 
which they would otherwise have suffered. 

I conclude, therefore, that the habit of moulting 
twice in the year was in most or all cases first acquired 
for some distinct purpose, perhaps for gaining a warmer 
® See Gould’s ‘ Birds of Great Britain.’ 

2z 


706 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


winter covering; and that variations in the plumage 
occurring during the summer were accumulated through 
sexual selection, and transmitted to the offspring at the 
same season of the year ; that such variations were 
inherited either by both sexes or by the males alone, 
according to the form of inheritance which prevailed. 
This appears more probable than that the species in 
all cases originally tended to retain their ornamental 
plumage during the winter, hut were saved from this 
through natural selection, resulting from the incon- 
venience or danger thus caused. 

I have endeavoured in this chapter to shew that the 
arguments are not trustworthy in favour of the view 
that weapons, bright colours, and various ornaments, 
are now confined to the males owing to the conversion, 
by natural selection, of the equal transmission of 
characters to both sexes, into transmission to the male 
sex alone. It is also doubtful whether the colours of 
many female birds are due to the preservation, for the 
sake of protection, of variations which were from the 
first limited in their transmission to the female sex. 
But it will be convenient to defer any further discussion 
on this subject until I treat, in the following chapter, 
of the differences in plumage between the young 
and old. 


Cb. XVI. BIRDS — INHERITANCE LIMITED BY AGE. 707 


CHAPTEK XYL 
Birds — concluded. 

The immature plumage in relation to the character of the plumage 
in both sexes when adult — Six classes of cases — Sexual differences 
between the males of closely-allied or representative species — The 
female assuming the characters of the male — Plumage of the 
young in relation to the summer and winter plumage of the 
adults — On the increase of beauty in the birds of the world — 
Protective colouring — Conspicuously-coloured birds — Novelty 
appreciated — Summary of the four chapters on Birds. 

We must now consider the transmission of characters, 
as limited by age, in reference to sexual selection. The 
truth and importance of the principle of inheritance 
at corresponding ages need not here be discussed, as 
enough has already been said on the subject. Before 
giving the several rather complex rules or classes of 
cases, under which the differences in plumage between 
the young and the old, as far as known to me, may be 
included, it will be well to make a few preliminary 
remarks. 

With animals of all kinds when the adults differ in 
colour from the young, and the colours of the latter are 
not, as far as we can see, of any special service, they 
may generally be attributed, like various embryological 
structures, to the retention of a former character. But 
this view can be maintained with confidence, only when 
the young of several species resemble each other closely, 
and likewise resemble other adult species belonging to 


708 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Past II. 


the same group ; for the latter are the living proofs 
that such a state of things was formerly possible. 
Young lions and pumas are marked with feeble stripes 
or rows of spots, and as many allied species both young 
and old are similarly marked, no believer in evolution 
will doubt that the progenitor of the lion and puma 
was a striped animal, and that the young have retained 
vestiges of the stripes, like the kittens of black cats, 
which are not in the least striped when grown up. 
Many species of deer, which when mature are not 
spotted, are whilst young covered with white spots, as 
are likewise some few species in the adult state. So 
again the young in the whole family of pigs (Suidae), 
and in certain rather distantly allied animals, such as 
the tapir, are marked with dark longitudinal stripes ; 
but here we have a character apparently derived from 
an extinct progenitor, and now preserved by the young 
alone. In all such cases the old have had their colours 
changed in the course of time, whilst the young have 
remained but little altered, and this has been effected 
through the principle of inheritance at corresponding 
ages. 

This same principle applies to many birds belonging 
to various groups, in which the young closely resemble 
each other, and differ much from their respective adult 
parents. The young of almost all the Gallinaceae, and 
of some distantly allied birds such as ostriches, are 
covered with longitudinally striped down; but this 
character points back to a state of things so remote 
that it hardly concerns us. Young cross-bills (Loxia) 
have at first straight beaks like those of other finches, 
and in their immature striated plumage they resemble 
^he mature^ redpole and female siskin^ as well as th^ 


. Ch. XVI. BIRDS — INHERITANOE LIMITED BY AGE. 709 

young of the goldfinch, greenfinch, and some other 
allied species. The young of many kinds of buntings 
(Emberiza) resemble one another, and likewise the adult 
state of the common bunting, E. miliaria. In almost the 
whole large group of thrushes the young have their breasts 
spotted — a character which is retained throughout life 
by many species, but is quite lost by others, as by the 
Turdus migratorius. So again with many thrushes, the 
feathers on the back are mottled before they are moulted 
for the first time, and this character is retained for life 
by certain eastern species. The young of many species 
of shrikes (Lanius), of some woodpeckers, and of an 
Indian pigeon {Chalcophaps indicus), are transversely 
striped on the under surface ; and certain allied species 
or whole genera are similarly marked when adult. In 
some closely-allied and resplendent Indian cuckoos 
f Chrysococcyx), the mature species differ considerably 
from one another in colour, but the young cannot be 
distinguished. The young of an Indian goose (JSarJci- 
diornis melanonotus) closely resemble in plumage an 
allied genus, Dendrocygna, when mature.^ Similar 
facts will hereafter be given in regard to certain herons. 
Young black-grouse {Tetrao tetrix) resemble the young 
as well as the old of certain other species, for instance 
the red-grouse or T. scoticus. Finally, as Mr. Blyth, 
who has attended closely to this subject, has well 
remarked, the natural affinities of many species are best 

^ lu regard to thrushes, mation. On thrushes, see alsc 
shrikes, and woodpeckers, see Audubon, ‘Ornith. Biography,’ 
^[r. Blyth, in Charlesworth’s vol. ii. p. 195. On Chrvsococcyx 
‘ Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ vol. i. 1837, and Chalcophaps, Blyth, as 
p. 304 ; also footnote to his quoted in Jerdon’s ‘ Birds of 
translation of Cuvier’s ‘ E^gne India,’ vol. iii. p. 485. On 
iVninial,’ p. 159. I give the case Sarkidiornis, Blyth, in ‘Ibis,’ 
of Loxia on Mr. B yth’s infer- 18G7, p. 175. 


710 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


exhibited in their immature plumage ; and as the true 
affinities of all organic beings depend on their descent 
from a common progenitor, this remark strongly con- 
firms the belief that the immature plumage approxi- 
mately shews us the former or ancestral condition of the 
species. 

Although many young birds, belonging to various 
families, thus give us a glimpse of the plumage of their 
remote progenitors, yet there are many other birds, 
both dull-coloured and bright-coloured, in which the 
young closely resemble their parents. In such cases 
the young of the diifferent species cannot resemble each 
other more closely than do the parents ; nor can they 
strikingly resemble allied forms when adult. They 
give us but little insight into the plumage of their 
progenitors, excepting in so far that, when the young 
and the old are coloured in the same general manner 
throughout a whole group of species, it is probable 
that their progenitors were similarly coloured. 

We may now consider the classes of cases, under 
which the differences and resemblances between the 
plumage of the young and the old, in both sexes or in 
one sex alone, may be grouped. Eules of this kind 
were first enounced by Cuvier ; but with the progress 
of knowledge they require some modification and 
amplification. This I have attempted to do, as far as 
the extreme complexity of the subject permits, from 
information derived from various sources; but a full 
essay on this subject by some competent ornithologist 
is much needed. In order to ascertain to what extent 
each rule prevails, I have tabulated the facts given in 
four great works, namely, by Macgillivray on the birds 
of Britain, Audubon on those of North America, Jerdon 


Ch. XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT FEMALES. 711 

on those of India, and Gould on those of Australia. I 
may here premise, first, that the several cases or rules 
graduate into each other ; and secondly, that when 
the young are said to resemble their parents, it is not 
meant that they are identically alike, for their colours 
are almost always less vivid, and the feathers are 
softer and often of a different shape. 


RULES OR CLASSES OF CASES. 

I. When the adult male is more beautiful or con- 
spicuous than the adult female, the young of both 
sexes in their first plumage closely resemble the adult 
female, as with the common fowl and peacock ; or, 
as occasionally occurs, they resemble her much more 
closely than they do the adult male. 

n. When the adult female is more conspicuous than 
the adult male, as sometimes though rarely occurs, the 
young of both sexes in their first plumage resemble 
the adult male. 

ni. When the adult male resembles the adult 
female, the young of both sexes have a peculiar first 
plumage of their own, as with the robin. 

lY. When the adult male resembles the adult 
female, the young of both sexes in their first plumage 
resemble the adults, as with the kingfisher, many 
parrots, crows, hedge- warblers. 

V. When the adults of both sexes have a distinct 
winter and summer plumage, whether or not the male 
differs from the female, the young resemble the adults 
of both sexes in their winter dress, or much more 
rarely in their summer dress, or they resemble the 
temales alone. Or the young may have an intermediate 


712 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part II 

character ; or again they may differ greatly from the 
adults in both their seasonal plumages. 

YI, In some few cases the young in their first 
plumage differ from each other according to sex ; the 
young males resembling more or less closely the adult 
males, and the young females more or less closely the 
, adult females. 

Class I. — In this class, the young of both sexes 
more or less closely resemble the adult female, whilst 
the adult male differs from the adult female, often in 
the most conspicuous manner. Innumerable instances 
in all Orders could be given ; it will suffice to call to 
mind the common pheasant, duck, and house-sparrow. 
The cases under this class graduate into others. Thus 
the two sexes when adult may differ so slightly, 
and the young so slightly from the adults, that it 
is doubtful whether such cases ought to come under 
the present, or under the third or fourth classes. So 
again the young of the two sexes, instead of being 
quite alike, may differ in a slight degree from each 
other, as in our sixth class. These transitional cases, 
however, are few, or at least are not strongly pro- 
nounced, in comparison with those which come strictly 
under the present class. 

The force of the present law is well shewn in those 
groups, in which, as a general rule, the two sexes and 
the young are all alike ; for when in these groups the 
male does differ from the female, as with certain parrots, 
kingfishers, pigeons, &c., the young of both sexes 
resemble the adult female.* We see the same fact 

2 See, for instance, Mr. Gould’s Kingfishers), in which, how’ever, 

account (‘ Handbook to the the young male, though reseni- 
Birds of Australia,’ vol. i. p. blin^ the adult female, is less 
lo3) of Cyaiialcyon (one of the brilliantly coloured, in some 


. Cel XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT FEMALES. 713 

exhibited still more clearly in certain anomalous cases ; 
thus the male of Heliothrix auriculata (one of the 
humming-birds) differs conspicuously from the female 
in having a splendid gorget and fine ear-tufts, but the 
female is remarkable from having a much longer tail 
than that of the male ; now the young of both sexes 
resemble (with the exception of the breast being 
spotted with bronze) the adult female in all other 
respects, including the length of her tail, so that the 
tail of the male actually becomes shorter as he reaches 
maturity, which is a most unusual circumstance.^ 
Again, the plumage of the male goosander (Mergus 
merganser) is more conspicuously coloured than that 
of the female, with the scapular and secondary wing- 
feathers much longer ; but differently from what 
occurs, as far as I know, in any other bird, the crest 
of the adul4» male, though broader than that of the 
female, is considerably shorter, being only a little 
above an inch in length ; the crest of the female being 
two and a half inches long. Now the young of both 
sexes entirely resemble the adult female, so that their 
crests are actually of greater length, though narrower, 
than in the adult male."* 


species of Dacelo the males have 
blue tails, and the females brown 
ones ; and Mr. R. B. Sharpe in- 
forms me that the tail of the 
young male of D. gaudichaudi 
is at first brown. Mr. Gould 
has described (ibid. vol. ii. pp. 
14, 20, 37) the sexes and the 
young of certain black Cockatoos 
and of the King Lory, with 
which the same rule prevails. 
Also Jerdon (‘Birds of India,’ 
vol. i. p. 260) on the Pahtornis 


rosa, in which the young are 
more like the female than the 
male. See Audubon (‘Ornith. 
Biograph.’ vol. ii. p. 475) on the 
two sexes aud the young of 
Columba passer ina. 

® I owe this information to 
Mr. Gould, wKo shewed me the 
sfMicimens ; see also his ‘ Intro- 
duction to the Trochilidae,’ 1861, 

p. 120. 

* Macgillivray, ‘Hist. Brit. 
Birds,’ vol. V. pp. 207-211. 


714 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


Wlien the young and the females closely resemble 
each other and both differ from the males, the most 
obvious conclusion is that the males alone have been 
modified. Even in the anomalous cases of the Helio- 
thrix and Mergus, it is probable that originally both 
adult sexes were furnished — the one species with a 
much elongated tail, and the other with a much 
elongated crest — these characters having since been 
partially lost by the adult males from some unex- 
plained cause, and transmitted in their diminished 
state to their male offspring alone, when arrived at 
the corresponding age of maturity. The belief that 
in the present class the male alone has been modified, 
as far as the differences between the male and the 
female together with her young are concerned, is 
strongly supported by some remarkable facts recorded 
by Mr. Blyth,® with respect to closely-allied species 
which represent each other in distinct countries. For 
with several of these representative species the adult 
males have undergone a certain amount of change and 
can be distinguished ; the females and the young from 
the distinct countries being indistinguishable, and 
therefore absolutely unchanged. This is the case 
with certain Indian chats (Thamnobia), with certain 
honey-suckers (Nectarinia), shrikes (Tephrodornis), 
certain kingfishers (Tanysiptera), Kalij pheasants 
(Gallophasis), and tree-partridges (Arboricola). 

In some analogous cases, namely with birds having 
a different summer and winter plumage, but with the 

See his admirable paper in xxix. In regard to Tanysiptera, 
the ‘ Journal of the Asiatic Soc. Prof. Schlegel told Mr. Blyth 
of Bengal,’ vol. xix. 1850, p. that he could distinguish several 
223; see also Jerdon, ‘Birds of disiinct races, solely by compar- 
India,’ vol. i. introduction. r>. ing the adult males. 


Ch. XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT FEMALES. 715 

two sexes nearly alike, certain closely-allied species 
can easily be distinguished in their summer or nuptial 
plumage, yet are indistinguishable in their winter as 
well as in their immature plumage. This is the 
case with some of the closely- allied Indian wag- tails 
or Motacillae. Mr. Swinhoe® informs me that three 
species of Ardeola, a genus of herons, which represent 
one another on separate continents, are “ most strik- 
“ ingly different ” when ornamented with their summer 
plumes, but are hardly, if at all, distinguishable during 
the winter. The young also of these three species in 
their immature plumage closely resemble the adults 
in their winter dress. This case is all the more in- 
teresting, because with two other species of Ardeola 
both sexes retain, during the winter and summer, 
nearly the same plumage as that possessed by the 
three first species during the winter and in their 
immature state ; and this plumage, which is common 
to several distinct species at different ages and seasons, 
probably shews us how the progenitors of the genus 
were coloured. In all these cases, the nuptial plumage 
which we may assume was originally acquired by the 
adult males during the breeding-season, and transmitted 
to the adults of both sexes at the corresponding season, 
has been modified, whilst the winter and immature 
plumages have been left unchanged. 

The question naturally arises, how is it that in 
these latter cases the winter plumage of both sexes, 
and in the former cases the plumage of the adult 
females, as well as the immature plumage of the 

* See Mr. Swinhoe, in from a note by Mr. Blytb, in 
* Ibis,’ July 1863, p. 131 ; and ‘ Ibis,’ Jan. 1861, p. 2o 
a previous paper, with an extract 


716 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


young, have not been at all affected ? The species 
which represent each other in distinct countries will 
almost always have been exposed to somewhat different 
conditions, hut we can hardly attribute to this action 
the modification of the plumage in the males alone, 
seeing that the females and the young, though similarly 
exposed, have not been affected. Hardly any fact 
shews us more clearly how subordinate in importance 
is the direct action of the conditions of life, in com- 
parison with the accumulation through selection of 
indefinite variations, than the surprising difference 
between the sexes of many birds ; for both will have 
consumed the same food, and have been exposed to the 
same climate. Nevertheless we are not precluded from 
believing that in the course of time new conditions 
may produce some direct effect either on both sexes, or 
from their constitutional differences chiefly on one sex. 
We see only that this is subordinate in importance to 
the accumulated results of selection. Judging, how- 
ever, from a wide-spread analogy, when a species 
migrates into a new country (and this must precede 
the formation of representative species), the changed 
conditions to which they will almost always have been 
exposed will cause them to undergo a certain amount 
of fluctuating variability. In this case sexual selection, 
which depends on an element liable to change — the 
taste or admiration of the female — will have had new 
shades of colour or other differences to act on and 
accumulate ; and as sexual selection is always at work, 
it would (from what we know of the results on domestic 
animals of man’s unintentional selection), be surprising 
if animals inhabiting separate districts, which can 
never cross and thus blend their newly-acquired char- 


Oh. XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT FEMALES. 717 

actera, were not, after a sufficient lapse of time, 
differently modified. These remarks likewise apply to 
the nuptial or summer plumage, whether confined to 
the males, or common to both sexes. 

Although the females of the above closely-allied or 
representative species, together with their young, differ 
hardly at all from one another, so that the males alone 
can be distinguished, yet the females of most species 
within the same genus obviously differ from each other. 
The differences, however, are rarely as great as between 
the males. We see this clearly in the whole family 
of the Gallinacese: the females, for instance, of the 
common and Japan pheasant, and especially of the 
Gold and Amherst pheasant — of the silver pheasant 
and the wild fowl — resemble one another very closely 
in colour, whilst the males differ to an extraordinary 
degree. So it is with the females of most of the 
Cotingidse, Fringillidse, and many other families. 
There can indeed be no doubt that, as a general rule, 
the females have been less modified than the males. 
Some few birds, however, offer a singular and inexplic- 
able exception ; thus the females of Paradisea apoda 
and P. papuana differ from each other more than do 
their respective males the female of the latter species 
having the under surface pure white, whilst the female 
P. apoda is deep brown beneath. So, again, as I hear 
from Professor Newton, the males of two species of 
Oxynotus (shrikes), which represent each other in the 
islands of Mauritius and Bourbon,® differ but little in 
colour, whilst the females differ much. In the Bourbon 
.species the female appears to have partially retained 

^ Wallace, ‘The Malay Archi- with coloured figures, by M. F. 
pclago,’ vol. ii. 1869, p. 394. Pollen, in ‘ Ibis,’ 1866, p. 275, 

• These species are described 


718 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


an immature condition of plumage, for at first sight 
she “ might be taken for the young of the Mauritian 
“ species.” These differences may he compared with 
those inexplicable ones, which occur independently of 
man’s selection in certain sub-breeds of the game-fowl, 
in which the females are very different, whilst the 
males can hardly be distinguished.® 

As I account so largely by sexual selection for the 
differences between the males of allied species, how 
can the differences between the females be accounted 
for in all ordinary cases ? We need not here consider 
the species which belong to distinct genera ; for with 
these, adaptation to different habits of life, and other 
agencies, will have come into play. In regard to the 
differences between the females within the same genus, 
it appears to me almost certain, after looking through 
various large groups, that the chief agent has been the 
greater or less transference to the female of the char- 
acters acquired by the males through sexual selection. 
In the several British finches, the two sexes differ 
either very slightly or considerably ; and if we compare 
the females of the greenfinch, chaffinch, goldfinch, 
bullfinch, crossbill, sparrow, &c., we shall see that they 
differ from one another chiefly in the points in which 
they partially resemble their respective males; and 
the colours of the males may safely be attributed to 
sexual selection. With many gallinaceous species the 
sexes differ to an extreme degree, as with the peacock, 
pheasant, and fov/1, whilst with other species there has 
been a partial or even complete transference of char- 
acter from the male to the female. The females of the 
several species of Polyplectron exhibit in a dim con- 
? ‘ Variation of Animals^ &c., under Domestication,’ vol. i. p. 2§1. 


Oh. XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT FEMALES. 719 

dition, and chiefly on the tail, the splendid ocelli of 
their males. The female partridge differs from the 
male only in the red mark on her breast being smaller ; 
and the female wild turkey only in her colours being 
much duller. In the guinea-fowl the two sexes are 
indistinguishable. There is no improbability in the 
plain, though peculiarly spotted plumage of this latter 
bird having been acquired through sexual selection by 
the males, and then transmitted to both sexes ; for it 
is not essentially different from the much more beau- 
tifully spotted, plumage, characteristic of the males 
alone of the Tragopan pheasants. 

It should be observed that, in some instances, the 
transference of characters from the male to the female 
has been effected apparently at a remote period, the 
male having subsequently undergone great changes, 
without transferring to the female any of his later- 
gained characters. For instance, the female and the 
young of the black-grouse {Tetrao tetrix) resemble 
pretty closely both sexes and the young of the red-grouse 
(T. scoticus) ; and we may consequently infer that the 
black-grouse is descended from some ancient species, of 
which both sexes were coloured in nearly the same 
manner as the red-grouse. As both sexes of this latter 
species are more distinctly barred during the breeding 
season than at any other time, and as the male differs 
slightly from the female in his more strongly- 
pronounced red and brown tints, we may conclude 
that his plumage has been influenced by sexual selec- 
tion, at least to a certain extent. If so, we may further 
infer that the nearly similar plumage of the female 
black-grouse was similarly produced at some former 

^ Macgillivray, ‘ Ilisr. British Birds,’ vol. i. pp. 172-174, 


720 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part 71 


period. But since this period the male black-grouse 
has acquired his fine black plumage, with his forked 
and outwardly-curled tail-feathers ; but of these charac- 
ters there has hardly been any transference to the 
female, excepting that she shews in her tail a trace of 
the curved fork. 

We may therefore conclude that the females of 
distinct though allied species have often had their 
plumage rendered more or less different by the trans- 
ference in various degrees of characters acquired by the 
males through sexual selection, both during former and 
recent times. But it deserves especial attention that 
brilliant colours have been transferred much more 
rarely than other tints. For instance, the male of the 
red-throated blue-breast (Gyanecula suecica) has a rich 
blue breast, including a sub-triangular red mark ; now 
marks of nearly the same shape have been transferred 
to the female, but the central space is fulvous instead 
of red, and is surrounded by mottled instead of blue 
feathers. The Gallinaceae offer many analogous cases ; 
for none of the species, such as partridges, quails, 
guinea-fowls, &c., in which the colours of the plumage 
have been largely transferred from the male to the 
female, are brilliantly coloured. This is well ex- 
emplified with the pheasants, in which the male is 
generally so much more brilliant than the female; 
but with the Eared and Cheer pheasants {Grossoptilon 
auritma and Phasianus wallichii) the sexes closely 
resemble each other and their colours are dull. We 
may go so far as to believe that if any part of the 
plumage in the males of these two pheasants had been 
brilliantly coloured, it would not have been transferred 
tp the females. These facts strongly support Mr, 


Ch. XVI. BIRDS—YOUNG LIKE ADULT FEMALEb. 721 

Wallace’s view that with birds which are exposed to 
much danger during incubation, the tiansference of 
bright colours from the male to the female has been 
checked through natural selection. We must not, 
however, forget that another explanation, before given, 
is possible ; namely, that the males which varied and 
became bright, whilst they were young and inex- 
perienced, would have been exposed to much danger, 
and would generally have been destroyed ; the older 
and more cautious males, on the other hand, if they 
varied in a like manner, would not only have been able 
to survive, but would have been favoured in their 
rivalry with other males. Now variations occurring 
late in life tend to be transmitted exclusively to the 
same sex, so that in this case extremely bright tints 
would not have been transmitted to the females. On 
the other hand, ornaments of a less conspicuous kind, 
such as those possessed by the Eared and Cheer 
pheasants, would not have been dangerous, and if they 
appeared during early youth, would generally have 
been transmitted to both sexes. 

In addition to the effects of the partial transference 
of characters from the males to the females, some of 
the differences between the females of closely allied 
species may be attributed to the direct or definite 
action of the conditions of life.^' With the males, any 
such action would generally have been masked by the 
brilliant colours gained through sexual selection ; but 
not so with the females. Each of the endless diversities 
in plumage which we see in our domesticated birds is, 
of course, the result of some definite cause ; and under 

" See, on this subject, ctiap. mals and Flan ts under Domesti - 
xxiii. in the * Variation of Ani- cation.’ 

3 A 


722 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


natural and more uniform conditions, some one tint, 
assuming that it was in no way injurious, would almost 
certainly sooner or later prevail. The free inter- 
crossing of the many individuals belonging to the same 
species would ultimately tend to make any change of 
colour, thus induced, uniform in character. 

No one doubts that both sexes of many birds have 
had their colours adapted for the sake of protection ; 
and it is possible that the females alone of some species 
may have been modified for this end. Although it 
would be a difficult, perhaps an impossible process, as 
shewn in the last chapter, to convert one form of 
transmission into another through selection, there would 
not be the least difficulty in adapting the colours of the 
female, independently of those of the male, to surround- 
ing objects, through the accumulation of variations 
which were from the first limited in their transmission 
to the female sex. If the variations were not thus 
limited, the bright tints of the male would be deterio- 
rated or destroyed. Whether the females alone of many 
species have been thus specially modified, is at present 
very doubtful. I wish I could follow Mr. Wallace to 
the full extent ; for the admission would remove some 
difficulties. Any variations which were of no service to 
the female as a protection would be at once obliterated, 
instead of being lost simply by not being selected, or 
from free intercrossing, or from being eliminated when 
transferred to the male and in any way injurious to him. 
Thus the plumage of the female would be kept constant 
in character. It would also be a relief if we could 
admit that the obscure tints of both sexes of many birds 
had been acquired and preserved for the sake of protec- 
tion, — for example, of the hedge- warbler or kitty-wren 


Ch. XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT FEMALES 723 


(Accentor modularis and Troglodytes vulgaris), with 
respect to which we have no sufficient evidence of the 
action of sexual selection. We ought, however, to be 
cautious in concluding that colours which appear to us 
dull, are not attractive to the females of certain species ; 
we should bear in mind such cases as that of the 
common house-sparrow, in which the male differs much 
from the female, but does not exhibit any bright tints. 
No one probably will dispute that many gallinaceous 
birds which live on the open ground, have acquired their 
present colours, at least in part, for the sake of protec- 
tion, We know how well they are thus concealed ; we 
know that ptarmigans, whilst changing from their 
winter to their summer plumage, both of which are 
protective, suffer greatly from birds of prey. But can 
we believe that the very slight differences in tints and 
markings between, for instance, the female black-grouse 
and red-grouse serve as a protection ? Are partridges, 
as they are now coloured, better protected than if 
they had resembled quails ? Do the slight differences 
between the females of the common pheasant, the 
Japan and gold pheasants, serve as a protection, or 
might not their plumages have been interchanged with 
impunity? From what Mr. Wallace has observed of 
the habits of certain gallinaceous birds in the East, he 
thinks that such slight differences are beneficial. For 
myself, I will only say that I am not convinced. 

Formerly when I was inclined to lay much stress on 
protection as accounting for the duller colours of female 
birds, it occurred to me that possibly both sexes and 
the young might aboriginally have been equally bright 
coloured ; but that subsequently, the females from the 
danger incurred during incubation, and the young 


724 THE DESCENT OF MAN Pabt II 

from being inexperienced, had been rendered dull as a 
protection. But this view is not supported by any 
evidence, and is not probable ; for we thus in imagina- 
tion expose during past times the females and the young 
to danger, from which it has subsequently been neces- 
sary to shield their modified descendants. We have, 
also, to reduce, through a gradual process of selection, 
the females and the young to alfnost exactly the same 
tints and markings, and to transmit them to the 
corresponding sex and period of life. On the suppo- 
sition that the females and the young have partaken 
during each stage of the process of modification of a 
tendency to be as brightly coloured as the males, it is 
also a somewhat strange fact that the females have 
never been rendered dull-coloured without the young 
participating in the same change ; for there are no 
instances, as far as I can discover, of species with 
the females dull and the young bright coloured. A 
partial exception, however, is oflfered by the young of 
certain woodpeckers, for they have “ the whole upper 
part of the head tinged with red,” which afterwards 
either decreases into a mere circular red line in the 
adults of both sexes, or quite disappears in the adult 
females.^^ 

Finally, with respect to our present class of cases, 
the most probable view appears to be that successive 
variations in brightness or in other ornamental charac- 
ters, occurring in the males at a rather late period of 
life have alone been preserved ; and that most or all 
of these variations, owing to the late period of life at 

Audubon, ‘ Ornith. Biogra- p. 85. See also the case before 
pliy,’ vol. i. p. 193. Macgilli- given of Indopicns rarlotta. • 
vray, ‘ Hist. Brit. Birds,’ vol. iii. 


Chap. XVI. BIRDS— YOUNG LIKE ADULT MALES. 725 

which they appeared, have been from the first trans- 
mitted only to the adult male offspring. Any variations 
in brightness occurring in the females or in the young, 
would have been of no service to them, and would not 
have been selected ; and moreover, if dangerous, would 
have been eliminated. Thus the females and the young 
will either have been left unmodified, or (as is much 
more common) will have been partially modified by 
receiving through transference from the males some of 
his successive variations. Both sexes have perhaps 
been directly acted on by the conditions of life to which 
they have long been exposed : but the females from not 
being otherwise much modified, will best exhibit any 
such effects. These changes and all others will have 
been kept uniform by the free intercrossing of many 
individuals. In some cases, especially with ground 
birds, the females and the young may possibly have 
been modified, independently of the males, for the sake 
of protection, so as to have acquired the same dull- 
coloured plumage. 

Class II. When the adult female is more conspicuous 
than the adult male, the young of both sexes in their first 
ylumage resemble the adult male. — This class is exactly 
the reverse of the last, for the females are here brighter 
coloured or more conspicuous than the males; and 
the young, as far as they are known, resemble the 
adult males instead of the adult females. But the 
difference between the sexes is never nearly so great 
as with many birds in the first class, and the cases are 
comparatively rare. Mr. Wallace, who first callbl 
attention to the singular relation which exists between 
the less bright colours of the males and their perform- 
ing the duties of incubation, lays great stress on this 


726 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


point, as a crucial test that obscure colours havo been 
acquired for the sake of protection during the period 
of nesting. A different view seems to me more pro- 
bable. As the cases are curious and not numerous, I 
will briefl}^ give all that I have been able to find. 

In one section of the genus Turnix, quail-like birds, 
the female is invariably larger than the male (being 
nearly twice as large in one of the Australian species), 
and this is an unusual circumstance with the Gallinaceje. 
In most of the species the female is more distinctly 
coloured and brighter than the male,^* but in some few 
species the sexes are alike. In Turnix taigoor of India 
the male “ wants the black on the throat and neck, 
“ and the whole tone of the plumage is lighter and less 
‘‘pronounced than that of the female.” The female 
appears to be noisier, and is certainly much more 
pugnacious than the male ; so that the females and 
not the males are often kept by the natives for fighting, 
like game-cocks. As male birds are exposed by the 
English bird-catchers for a decoy near a trap, in order 
to catch other males by exciting their rivalry, so the 
females of this Turnix are employed in India. When 
thus exposed the females soon begin their “ loud 
“ purring call, which can be heard a long way off, and 
“ any females within ear-shot run rapidly to the spot, 
“ and commence fighting with the caged bird.” In this 
way from twelve to twenty birds, all breeding females, 
may be caught in the course of a single day. The 

‘ Westminster Review,’ July In the British Museum speci- 
1867, and A. Murray, ‘Journal mens of the Australian Plain- 
of Travel,’ 1868, p. 83. wanderer {Pedionomus torqua- 

For the Australian species, tus) may be seen, shewing simi- 
see Grould’s ‘ Handbook,’ &c., vol. lar sexual differences, 
ii. pp. 178, 180, 186, and 188. 


Chap. XVI BIRDS — YOUNG IJKE ADULT MAI.ES. 727 

natives assert that the females after Inying their eggs 
associate in flocks, and leave the males to sit on them. 
There is no reason to doubt the truth of this assertion, 
which is supported by some observations made in 
China by Mr. Swinhoe.^*^ Mr. Blyth believes, that the 
young of both sexes resemble the adult male. 

The females of the three species of Painted Snipes 
(Rhynchsea, fig. 62) “ are not only larger but much more 
“ richly coloured than the males.” With all other 
birds in which the trachea differs in structure in the 
two sexes it is more developed and complex in the 
male than in the female ; but in the Rhynclisea australis 
it is simple in the male, whilst in the female it makes 
four distinct convolutions before entering the lungs.^' 
The female therefore of this species has acquired an 
eminently masculine character. Mr. Blyth ascertained, 
by examining many specimens, that the trachea is 
not convoluted in either sex of R. hengalensis, which 
species resembles R. australis so closely, that it can 
hardly be distinguished except by its shorter toes. 
This fact is another striking instance of tho law that 
secondary sexual characters are often widely different 
in closely-allied forms, though it is a very rare cir- 
cumstance when such differences relate to the female 
sex. The young of both sexes of R. hengalensis in 
their first plumage are said to resemble the mature 
male.^® There is also reason to believe that the male 
undertakes the duty of incubation, for Mr. Swinhoe^^ 


Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ 
vol. iii. p. 596. Mr. Swinhoe,in 
‘ Ibis,’ 1866, p. 642 ; 1866, pp. 
131, 406. 

Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ 
Yol. iii. p. 677. . 


Gould’s ‘ Handbook to the 
Birds of Australia,’ vol. ii. p. 
275. 

‘The Indian Field,’ Sept. 
1858, p. 3. 

‘Ibis; 1866, p. 208. 



728 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part IL 

found the females before the close of the summer 
associated in flocks, as occurs with the females of the 
Turnix. 

The females of Phalaropics fvMcarius and P. hyper- 


loreus are larger, and in their summer plumage “ more 
“ gaily attired than the males.” But the difference in 
colour between the sexes is far from conspicuous. 
According to Professor Steenstrup, the male alone of 
P. fulicarius undertakes the duty of incubation ; this is 


Rhyncha>a caponsla (from Brehm). 


F’ig. (i2. 


Ofap XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT MALES. 729 


likewise shewn by the state of his breast-feathers 
during the breeding season. The female of the dotterel 
plover (Eud/romias morineUus) is larger than the male, 
and has the red and black tints on the lower surface, 
the white crescent on the breast, and the stripes over 
the eyes, more strongly pronounced. The male also 
takes at least a share in hatching the eggs ; hut the 
female likewise attends to the young.^® I have not 
been able to discover whether with these species the 
young resemble the adult males more closely than the 
adult females ; for the comparison is somewhat difficult 
to make on account of the double moult. 

Turning now to the Ostrich order : the male of the 
common cassowary galeatus)v^ovldi be thought 
by any one to be the female, from his smaller size and 
from the appendages and naked skin about his head 
being much less brightly coloured ; and I am informed 
by Mr. Bartlett that in the Zoological Gardens, it is 
certainly the male alone who sits on the eggs and 
takes care of the young.^' The female is said by Mr. 
T. W. Wood^^ to exhibit during the breeding season 
a most pugnacious disposition ; and her wattles then 


^ For these several state- 
ments, see Mr. Gould’s ‘Birds 
of Great Britain.’ Prof. Newton 
informs me that he has long 
been convinced, from his own 
observations and from those of 
others, that the males of the 
above-named sj^ecies take either 
the whole or a large share of the 
duties of incubation, and that 
they “ shew much greater de- 
“ votion towards their young, 
“ when in danger, than do the 
“ I'emales.” So it is, as he in- 
forms me, with Limosa lapponica 


and some few other Waders, in 
which the females are larger and 
have more strongly contrasted 
colours than the males. 

The natives of Ceram 
(Wallace, ‘ Malay Archipelago,’ 
vol. ii. p. 150) atsert that the 
male and female sit alternately 
on the eggs ; but this assertion, 
as Mr. Bartlett thinks, may be 
accounted for by the female 
visiting the nest to lay her eggs. 

^ ‘ The Student,’ April 1870, 
p. 124. 


730 


THE DESCENT OF MAN, 


Part IL 


become enlarged and more brilliantly coloured. So 
again the female of one of the emus (Dromseus irroratus) 
is considerably larger than the male, and she possesses 
a slight top-knot, but is otherwise indistinguishable 
in plumage. She appears, however, “ to have greater 
“ power, when angry or otherwise excited, of erecting, 
“ like a turkey-cock, the feathers of her neck and 
“ breast. She is usually the more courageous and 
“ pugilistic. She makes a deep hollow guttural boom 
“ especially at night, sounding like a small gong. The 
“ male has a slenderer frame and is more docile, with 
“ no voice beyond a suppressed hiss when angry, or a 
“ croak.” He not only performs the whole duty of 
incubation, but has to defend the young from their 
mother ; “ for as soon as she catches sight of her 
“ progeny she becomes violently agitated, and notwith- 
“ standing the resistance of the father appears to use 
“ her utmost endeavours to destroy them. For months 
“ afterwards it is unsafe to put the parents together, 
“ violent quarrels being the inevitable result, in w^hich 
“ the female generally comes off conqueror.” So that 

with this emu we have a complete reversal not only 
of the parental and incubating instincts, but of the 
usual moral qualities of the two sexes ; the females 
being savage, quarrelsome, and noisy, the males gentle 
and good. The case is very different with the African 
ostrich, for the male is somewhat larger than the 
female and has finer plumes with more strongly con- 
trasted colours ; nevertheless he undertakes the whole 
duty of incubation.^^ 

See the excellent account nett, in ‘Land and Water,’ May 
of the hahits of this bird under 1868, p. 233. 
confinement, by Mr. A. W. Ben- ^ Mr. Sclater, on the incuba- 


BIEDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT MALES. 731 

I will specify the few other cases known to me, in 
which the female is more conspicuously coloured than 
the male, although nothing is known about the manner 
of incubation. With the carrion-hawk of the Falkland 
Islands {Milvago leucurus) I was much surprised to find 
by dissection that the individuals, which had all their 
tints strongly pronounced, with the cere and legs 
orange-coloured, wer© the adult females ; whilst those 
with duller plumage and grey legs were the males or 
the young. In an Australian tree-creeper {Glimacteris 
erythrops) the female differs from the male in “ being 
“ adorned with beautiful, radiated, rufous markings on 
“ the throat, the male having this part quite plain.” 
Lastly, in an Australian night-jar ‘‘ the female always 
“ exceeds the male in size and in the brilliance of her 
“ tints ; the males, on the other hand, have two white 
“ spots on the primaries more conspicuous than in the 
•^female.” 


tion of the Struthiones, ‘ Proc. 
Zool. Soc.,’ June 9, 1863. So 
It is with the Ehea darwinii: 
Captain Musters says (‘ At home 
•vith the Patagonians,’ 1871, p. 
128), that the male is larger, 
stronger and swifter than the 
lemale, and of slightly darker 
colours ; yet he takes sole charge 
of the eg'^s and of the young, 
just as does the male of the.com- 
mon species of. Rhea. 

^ For the Milvago, see ‘ Zool- 
ogy of the Voyage of the Beagle,’ 
Birds, 1841, p. 16. For the 
Glimacteris and night-jar (Eu- 
rostopodus), see Gould’s ‘ Hand- 
book to the Birds of Australia,’ 
vol. i. pp. 602 and 97. The New 
Zea’and shieldrake {Tadorna 
variegata) offers a qmte ano- 


malous case ; the head of the fe- 
male is pure white, and her back 
is redder than that of the male; 
the head of the male is of a rich 
dark bronzed colour, and his back 
is clothed with finely pencilled 
slate-coloured feathers, so that 
altogether he may be considered 
as the more beautiful of the two 
He is larger and more pugna- 
cious than the feniale, and does 
not sit on the eggs. So that in 
all these respects this species 
comes under our first class of 
cases; but Mr. Sclater (‘Proc. 
Zool. Soc.’ 1866, p. 150) was 
much surprised to observe that 
the young of both sexes, when 
about three months old, resem- 
bled in their dark heads and 
necks the adult males, instead 


732 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part H. 


We thus see that the cases in which female birds are 
more conspicuously coloured than the males, with the 
young in their immature plumage resembling the adult 
males instead of the adult females, as in the previous 
class, are not numerous, though they are distributed in 
various Orders. The amount of difference, also, between 
the sexes is incomparably less than that which fre- 
quently occurs in the last class ; so that the cause of 
the difference, whatever it may have been, has here 
acted on the females either less energetically or less 
persistently than on the males in the last class. Mr. 
Wallace believes that the males have had their colours 
rendered less conspicuous for the sake of protection 
during the period of incubation ; but the difference 
between the sexes in hardly any of the foregoing cases 
appears sufficiently great for this view to be safely 
accepted. In some of the cases, the brighter tints of 
the female are almost confined to the lower surface, 
and the males, if thus coloured, would not have been 
exposed to danger whilst sitting on the eggs. It 
should also be borne in mind that the males are not 
only in a slight degree less conspicuously coloured 
than the females, but are smaller and weaker. They 
have, moreover, not only acquired the maternal instinct 
of incubation, but are less pugnacious and vociferous 
than the females, and in one instance have simpler 
vocal organs. Thus an almost complete transposition 
of the instincts, habits, disposition, colour, size, and of 
some points of structure, has been effected between the 
two sexes. 


of the fi'iult females ; so that it whilst the males and the young 

would appear in this case that have retained a former state of 

the females hav^e been modified, plumage. 


Chap; XVI. BIKDS — YOUNG LIKE ADULT MALES. 733 

Now if we might assume that the males in the 
present class have lost some of that ardour which is 
usual to their sex, so that they no longer search eagerly 
for the females ; or, if we might assume that the 
females have become much more numerous than the 
males — and in the case of one Indian Turnix the 
females are said to he “ much more commonly met 
with than the males ” — then it is not improbable 
that the females would have been led to court the 
males, instead of being courted by them. This indeed 
is the case to a certain extent with some birds, as we 
have seen with the peahen, wild turkey, and certain 
kinds of grouse. Taking as our guide the habits of 
most male birds, the greater size and strength as well 
as the extraordinary pugnacity of the females of the 
Turnix and emu, must mean that they endeavour to 
drive away rival females, in order to gain possession 
of the male; and on this view all the facts become 
clear ; for the males would probably be most charmed 
or excited by the females which were the most at- 
tractive to them by their bright colours, other orna- 
ments, or vocal powers. Sexual selection would then 
do its work, steadily adding to the attractions of the 
females ; the males and the young being left not at all, 
or but little modified. 

Class III. When the adult male resembles the adult 
female^ the young of both sexes have a 'peculiar first 
plumage of their own . — In this class the sexes when 
adult resemble each other, and differ from the young. 
This occurs with many birds of many kinds. The male 
robin can hardly be distinguished from the female, but 
the young are widely different, with their mottled 

® Jerdon, * Birds of India,’ vd. iii p. 598. 


734 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Pakt 11 

dusky -olive and brown plumage. The male and female 
of tbe splendid scarlet ibis are alike, whilst the young 
are brown ; and the scarlet colour, though common to 
both sexes, is apparently a sexual character, for it is 
not well developed in either sex under confinement; 
and a loss of colour often occurs with brilliant males 
when they are confined. With many species of herons 
the young differ greatly from the adults; and the 
summer plumage of the latter, though common to both 
sexes, clearly has a nuptial character. Young swans 
are slate-coloured, whilst the mature birds are pure 
white ; but it would be superfluous to give additional 
instances. These differences between the young and 
the old apparently depend, as in the last two classes, 
on the young having retained a former or ancient state 
of plumage, whilst the old of both sexes have acquired 
a new one. When the adults are bright coloured, we 
may conclude from the remarks just made in relation 
to the scarlet ibis and to many herons, and from the 
analogy of the species in the first class, that such 
colours have been acquired through sexual selection 
by the nearly mature males ; but that, differently from 
what occurs in the first two classes, the transmission, 
though limited to the same age, has not been limited 
to the same sex. Consequently, the sexes when mature 
resemble each other and differ from the young. 

Class IY. When the adult male resembles the adult 
female^ the yowng of both sexes in their first filumage 
resemble the adults . — In this class the young and the 
adults of both sexes, whether brilliantly or obscurely 
coloured, resemble each other. Such cases are, I think, 
more common than those in the last class. We have 
in England instances in the kingfisher, some wood- 


CfiAP. XVI. BIRDS— YOUNG LIKE BOTH ADULTS. 735 


peckers, the jay, magpie, crow, and many small dull- 
coloured birds, such as the hedge- warbler or kitty- wren. 
But the similarity in plumage between the young and 
the old is never complete, and graduates away into 
dissimilarity. Thus the young of some members of 
the kingfisher family are not only less vividly coloured 
than the adults, hut many of the feathers on the lower 
surface are edged with brown,^^ — a vestige probably of 
a former state of the plumage. Frequently in the same 
group of birds, even within the same genus, for instance 
in an Australian genus of parrakeets (Platycercus), 
the young of some species closely resemble, whilst the 
young of other species differ considerably, from their 
parents of both sexes, which are alike.^® Both sexes 
and the young of the common jay are closely similar ; 
but in the Canada jay the young 

differ so much from their parents that they were 
formerly described as distinct species.*® 

I may remark before proceeding that, under the 
present and next two classes of cases, the facts are so 
complex and the conclusions so doubtful, that any one 
who feels no especial interest in the subject had better 
pass them over. 

The brilliant or conspicuous colours which characterise many 
birds in the present class, can rarely or never be of service to them 
as a protection ; so that they have probably been gained by the 
males through sexual selection, and then transferred to the females 
and the young. It is, however, possible that the males may have 
selected the more attractive females ; and if these transmitt^ their 
characters to their offspring of both sexes, the same results would 

^ Jerdon, ‘ Birds of India,’ “ Gould, ibid, voh ii. pp. 37 
vol, i. pp. 222, 228. Gould’s 46, 56. * 

‘ Handbook to the Birds of Aus- “ Audubon, ‘ Omith. Bio- 
tralia ’ vol. i. pp. 124, 130. grai^hy,’ vol. ii. p. 55. 


736 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past II. 


folio V/ as from the selection of the more attractive males by the 
females. But there is evidence that this contingency has rarely, if 
ever, occurred in any of those groups of birds in which the sexes are 
generally alike ; for, if even a few of the successive variations had 
failed to be transmitted to both sexes, the females would have 
slightly exceeded the males in beauty. Exactly the reverse occurs 
under nature ; for, in almost every large group in which the sexes 
generally resemble each other, the males of some few species are in a 
slight degree more brightly coloured than the females. It is again 
possible that the females may have selected the more beautiful 
males, these males having reciprocally selected the more beautiful 
females ; but it is doubtful whether this double process of selection 
would be likely to occur, owing to the greater eagerness of one sex 
than the other, and whether it would be more efficient than selection 
on one side alone. It is, therefore, the most probable view that 
sexual selection has acted, in the pi esent class, as far as ornamental 
characters are concerned, in accordance with the general rule through- 
out the animal kingdom, that is, on the males ; and that these have 
transmitted their gradually-acquired colours, either equally or almost 
equally, to their offspring of both sexes. 

Another point is more doubtful, namely, whether the successive 
variations first appeared in the males after they had become nearly 
mature, or whilst quite young. In either case sexual selection must 
have acted on the male when he had to compete with rivals for the 
possession of the female; and in both cases the characters thus 
acquired have been transmitted to both sexes and all ages. But 
these characters if acquired by the males when adult, may have been 
transmitted at first to the adults alone, and at some subsequent 
period transferred to the young. For it is known that, when the law 
of inheritance at corresponding ages fails, the offspring often inherit 
characters at an earlier age than that at which they first appeared 
in their parents.®® Cases apparently of this kind have been observed 
with birds in a state of nature. For instance Mr. Blyth has seen 
specimens of Lanius rufus and of Colywhui glacialis which had 
assumed whilst young, in a quite anomalous manner, the adult 
plumage of their parents.®^ Again, the young of the common swan 
(Cygnus olor) do not cast off their dark feathers and become white 
until eighteen months or two years old ; but Dr. F. Forel has 

‘ Variation of Animals and ®^ Cliarles worth’s ‘ Mag. of 
Plants under Domestication,’ Nat. Hist.’ vol. i. 1837, pp. 305, 
vol. ii. p. 79. 306. 


Chap. XVI. BIRDS— YOUNG LIKE BOTH ADULTS. 737 


described the case of three vigorous young birds, out of a brood of 
four, which were born pure white. These young birds were not 
albinoes, as shewn by the colour of their beaks and legs, which 
nearly resembled the same parts in the adults.®* 

It may be worth while to illustrate the above three modes by 
which, in the present class, the two sexes and the young may have 
come to resemble each other, by the curious case of the genus 
Passer.®® In the house-sparrow (P. domesticus) the male differs 
much from the female and from the young. The young and the 
females are alike, and resemble to a large extent both sexes and the 
young of the sparrow of Palestine (P. hrachydactylus\ as well as of 
some allied species. We may therefore assume that the female and 
young of the house-sparrow approximately shew us the plumage ol 
the progenitor of the genus. Now with the tree-sparrow (P. mon- 
tanus) both sexes and the young closely resemble the male* of the 
house-sparrow ; so that they have all been modified in the same 
manner, and all depart from the typical colouring of their early 
progenitor. This may have been effected by a male ancestor of the 
tree-sparrow having varied, firstly, when nearly mature ; or, secondly, 
whilst quite young, and by having in either case transmitted his 
modified plumage to the females and the young ; or, thirdly, he 
may have varied when adult and transmitted his plumage to both 
adult sexes, and, owing to the failure of the law of inheritance at 
corresponding ages, at some subsequent period to his young. 

It is impossible so decide which of these three modes has generally 
prevailed throughout the present class of cases. That the males 
varied whilst young, and transmitted their variations to their off- 
spring of both sexes, is the most probable. I may here add that I 
have, with little success, endeavoured, by consulting various works, to 
decide how far the period of variation in birds has generally deter- 
mined the transmission of characters to one sex or to both. The 
two rules, often referred to (namely, that variations occurring late in 
life are transmitted to one and the same sex, whilst those which 
occur early in life are transmitted to both sexes), apparently hold 


®* ‘Bulletin de la Soc. Vaudoise 
dcs Sc. Nat.* vol. x. 1869, p. 
132. The young of the Polish 
swan, Oygnus immutahilis of 
Yairell, are always white ; but 
this species, as Mr. Sclater in- 
forms me, is believed to be 
nothing more than a variety of 


the domestic swan (Cygnus 
olor). 

®® I am indebted to Mr. Blyth 
for information in regard to this 
genas. The sparrow of Pales- 
tine belongs to the sub-genus 
Petronia. 

o B 


738 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IT. 


good in the first, second, and fourth classes of cases ; but they fail 
in the third, often in the fifth,®® and in the sixth small class. They 
apply, however, as far as I can judge, to a considerable majority of 
the species ; and we must not forget the striking generalisation by 
Dr. W. Marshall with respect to the protuberances on the heads of 
birds. Whether or not the two rules generally hold good, we may 
conclude from the facts given in the eighth chapter, that the period 
of variation is one important element in determining the form of 
transmission. 

With birds it is difficult to decide by what standard we ought to 
judge of the earliness or lateness of the period of variation, whether 
by the age in reference to the duration of life, or to the power of 
reproduction, or to the number of moults through which the species 
passes. The moulting of birds, even within the same family, some- 
times differs much without any assignable cause. Some birds moult 
so early, that nearly all the body feathers are cast off before the first 
wing-feathers are fully grown ; and we cannot believe that this was 
the primordial state of things. When the period of moulting has 
been accelerated, the age at which the colours of the adult plumage 
are first developed will falsely appear to us to be earlier than it 
really is. This may be illustrated by the practice followed by some 
bird-fanciers, who pull out a few feathers from the breast of nestling 
bullfinches, and from the head or neck of young gold-pheasants, in 
order to ascertain their sex ; for in the males, these feathers are 
immediately replaced by coloured ones.®® The actual duration of life 
is known in but few birds, so that we can hardly judge by this 
standard. And, with reference to the period at which the ix)wer of 


®^ For instance, the males of 
Tanagra xstiva and Fringilla 
cyanea require three years, the 
male of Fringilla ciris four years, 
to complete their beautiful plu- 
mage. (See Audubon, ‘ Ornith. 
Biography,’ vol. i. pp. 233, 280, 
378.) The Harlequin duck takes 
three years (ibid. vol. iii. p. 614), 
The male of the Gold pheasant, 
as I hear from Mr. Jenner Weir, 
can be distinguished from the 
female when about three months 
old, but he does not acquire his 
full splendour until the end of 


the September in the following 
year. 

®® Thus the Ihis tantalus and 
Grus americanus take four years, 
the Flamingo several years, and 
the Ardea ludovicana two years, 
before they acquire their perfect 
plumage. See Audubon, ibid, 
vol. i. p. 221 ; vol. iii. pp. 133, 
139 211 

®® Mr. Blyth, in Charles- 
worth’s ‘Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ vol. 
i. 1837, p. 300. Mr. Bartlett 
has informed me in regard to 
gold-pheasants, 


Chap. XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE BOTH ADULTS. 739 


reproduction is gained, it is a remarkable fact that various birds 
occasionally breed whilst retaining their immature plumage.” 

The fact of birds breeding in their immature plumage seems 
opposed to the belief that sexual selection has played as important 
a part, as I believe it has, in giving ornamental colours, plumes, &c., 
to the males, and, by means of equal transmission, to the females of 
many species. The objection would be a valid one, if the younger 
and less ornamented males were as successful in winning females and 
propagating their kind, as the older and more beautiful males. But 
we have no reason to suppose that this is the case. Audubon 
speaks of the breeding of the immature males of Ibis tantalus as a 
rare event, as does Mr. Swinhoe, in regard to the immature males of 
Oriolus.*® If the young of any species in their immature plumage 
were more successful in winning partners than the adults, the adult 
plumage would probably soon be lost, as the males would prevail, 
which retained their immature dress for the longest period, and thus 
the character of the species would ultimately be modified.” If, on 
the other hand, the young never succeeded in obtaining a female, 
the habit of early reproduction would perhaps be sooner or later 
eliminated, from being superfluous and entailing waste of power. 


” I have noticed the follow- 
ing cases in Audubon’s ‘ Ornith. 
Biography.’ The redstart of 
America, (^Muscajpica ruticilla, 
vol. i. p. 203). The 1 bis tantalus 
lakes four years to come to full 
maturity, but sometimes breeds 
in the second year (vol. iii. p. 
133). The Grus americanns 
takes the same time, but breeds 
before acquiring its ftill plumage 
(vol. iii. p. 2li). The adults of 
Ardea cxrulea are blue, and the 
young white; and white, mot- 
tled, and mature blue birds may 
all be seen breeding together 
(vol. iv. p. 58) : but Mr. Blyth 
informsmethatcertain herons ap- 
parently are dimorphic, for white 
and coloured individuals of the 
same age may be observed. The 
Harlequin duck {Anas histrio- 
nica, Linn.) takes three years to 
acquire its full plumage, though 


many birds breed in the second 
year (vol. iii. p. 614). The 
White-headed Eagle (Falco leu- 
cocephalus, vol. iii. p. 210) is 
likewise known to breed in its 
immature state. Some species 
of Oriolus (according to Mr. 
Blyth and Mr. Swinhoe, in 
‘ Ibis,’ July 1863, p. 68) like- 
wise breed before they attain 
their full plumage. 

See the last foot-note. 

” Other animals, belonging 
to quite distinct classes, are 
either habitually or occasionally 
capable of breeding before they 
have fully acquired their adult 
characters. This is the case 
with the young males of the 
salmon. Several amphibians 
have been known to breed whilst 
retaining their larval structure. 
Fritz Miiller has shewn Facts 
and arguments for Darwin,’ Eng. 


740 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part H. 


The plumage of certain birds goes on increasing in beauty during 
many years after they are fully mature ; this is the case with the 
train of the peacock, with some of the birds of paradise, and with 
the crest and plumes of certain herons, for instance, the Ardea 
ludovicana}^ But it is doubtful whether the continued develop- 
ment of such feathers is the result of the selection of successive 
beneficial variations (though this is the most probable view with 
birds of paradise) or merely of continuous growth. Most fishes 
continue increasing in size, as long as they are in good health and 
have plenty of food ; and a somewhat similar law may prevail with 
the plumes of birds. 

Class V. When the adults of both sexes have a distinct winter 
and summer plumage, whether or not the male differs from the 
female, the young resemble the adults of both sexes in their winter 
dress, or much more rarely in their summer dress, or they resemble 
the females alone. Or the young may have an intermediate 
character ; or, again, they may differ greatly from the adults in 
both their seasonal plumages. — The cases in this class are singularly 
complex; nor is this sui-prising, as they depend on inheritance, 
limited in a greater or less degree in three different ways, namely, 
by sex, age, and the season of the year. In some cases the 
individuals of the same species pass through at least five distinct 
states of plumage. With the species, in which the male differs 
from the female during the summer season alone, or, which is rarer, 
during both seasons," the young generally resemble the females, — 
as with the so-called goldfinch of North America, and apparently 


trans. 1869, p. 79) that the 
males of several amphipod crus- 
taceans become sexually mature 
whilst young ; and I infer that 
this is a case of premature 
breeding, because they have not 
as yet acquired their fully-de- 
veloped claspers. All such facts 
are highly interesting, as bear- 
ing on one means by which 
species may undergo great modi- 
fications of character. 

Jerdon, ‘Birds of India,’ 
vol. iii. p. 507, on the peacock. 
Pr. Marshall thinks that the 


older and more brilliant males 
of birds of paradise, have an 
advantage over the younger 
males ; see ‘ Archives N^erlan- 
daises,’ tom. vi. 1871. — On Ar- 
dea, Audubon, ibid. vol. iii. p. 
139. 

For illustrative cases see 
vol. iv. of Macgillivray’s * Hist. 
Brit. Birds;’ on Tringa, &c., 
pp. 229, 271 ; on the Machetes, 
p. 172; on the Charadrius 
hiaticula, p. 118 ; on the Chara- 
drius pluvialis, p. 91, 


Chap. XVI. BIRDS— YOUNG LIKE BOTH ADULTS. 741 


with the splendid Maluri of Australia.^ With those species, the 
sexes of which are alike during both the summer and winter, the 
young may resemble the adults, firstly, in their winter dress ; 
secondly, and this is of much rarer occurrence, in their summer 
dress ; thirdly, they may be intermediate between these two states ; 
and, fourthly, they may differ greatly from the adults at all 
seasons. We have an instance of the first of these four cases in 
one of the egrets of India (^Buphus coromandus), in which the 
young and the adults of both sexes are white during the winter, 
the adults l)ecoming golden-bulf during the summer. With the 
gaper {Anastomus oscitans) of India we have a similar case, but the 
colours are reversed : for the young and the adults of both sexes 
are grey and black during the winter, the adults becoming white 
during the summer.^ As an instance of the second case, the 
young of the razor-bill {Alca torda, Linn.), in an early state of 
]>lumage, are coloured like the adults during the summer ; and the 
young of the white-crowned sparrow of North America {Fringilla 
hucophrys), as soon as fledged, have elegant white stripes on their 
heads, which are lost by the yoang and the old during the winter.'*^ 
With respect to the third case, namely, that of the young having 
an intermediate character between the summer and winter adult 
plumages, Yarrell^ insists that this occurs with many waders. 
Lastly, in regard to the young differing greatly from both sexes in 
their adult summer and winter plumages, this occurs with some 
herons and egrets of North America and India, — the young alone 
being white. 

I will make only a few remarks on these complicated cases. 
When the young resemble the females in their summer dress, or 
the adults of both sexes in their winter dress, the cases differ from 
those given under Classes I. and III. only in the characters 
originally acquired by the males during the breeding-season, having 


For the goldfinch of N. 
America, Fringilla tristis, 
Linn., see Audubon, ‘ Ornith. 
Biography,’ vol. i. p. 172. For 
the Maluri, Gould’s * Handbook 
to the Birds of Australia,* vol. i. 
p. 318. 

I am indebted to Mr. Blyth 
for information as to the Buphus ; 
see also Jerdon, * Birds of India,’ 
vol. iii. p. 749. On the Anas- 


tomus, see Blyth, in * Ibis,’ 1867, 
p. 173. 

** On the Alca, see Macgilli- 
vray, * Hist. Brit. Birds,’ vol. v. 
p. 347. On the Fringilla leu- 
cophrySf Audubon, ibid. vol. ii. 
p. 89. I shall have hereafter to 
refer to the young of certain 
herons and egrets iSing white. 

‘ History of British Birds,’ 
vol. i. 1839, p. 159. 


742 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


been limited in their transmission to the corresponding season. 
When the adults have a distinct summer and winter plumage, and 
the young differ from both, the case is more difficult to understand. 
We may admit as probable that the young have retained an ancient 
state of plumage; we can account by sexual selection for the 
summer or nuptial plumage of the adults, but how are we to 
account for their distinct winter plumage ? If we could admit that 
'this plumage serves in all cases as a protection, its acquirement 
would be a simple affair ; but there seems no good reason for this 
admission. It may be suggested that the widely different con- 
ditions of life during the winter and summer have acted in a direct 
manner on the plumage ; this may have had some effect, but I 
have not much confidence in so great a difference as we sometimes 
see between the two plumages, having been thus caused. A more 
probable explanation is, that an ancient style of plumage, partially 
modified through the transference of some characters from the 
summer plumage, has been retained by the adults during the 
winter. Finally, all the cases in our present class apparently 
depend on characters acquired by the adult males, having been 
variously limited in their transmission according to age, season, and 
sex ; but it would not be worth while to attempt to follow out 
these complex relations. 

Class VI. ITie young in their first plumage differ from each 
other according to sex ; the young males resemhling more or less 
closely the adult males, and the young females more or less closely 
the adult females. — ^'he cases in the present class, though occurring 
in various groups, are not numerous; yet it seems the most natural 
thing that the young should at first somewhat resemble the adults 
of the same sex, and gradually become more and more like them. 
The adult male blackcap (^Sylvia atricapilla') has a black head, 
that of the female being reddish-brown; and I am informed by 
Mr. Blyth, that the young of both sexes can be distinguished by 
this character even as nestlings. In the family of thrushes an 
unusual number of similar cases have been noticed ; thus, the male 
blackbird (^Tardus merula) can be distinguished in the nest from 
the female. The two sexes of the mocking bird (f Tardus poly glottus, 
Linn.) differ very little from each other, yet the males can easily be 
distinguished at a very early age from the females by showing more 
pure white.^® The males of a forest-thrush and of a rock-thrush 


Audubon, ‘Ornith. Biography,’ vol. i. p. 113. 


Chap. XVI. BIRDS — YOUNG LIKE BOTH ADULTS. 743 


(Orocetcs erythrogastra and Petrocincla cyanta) have much of their 
plumage of a fine blue, whilst the females are brown; and the 
nestling males of both species have their main wing and tail-feathers 
edged with blue whilst those of the female are edged with brown 
In the young blackbird the wing-feathers assume their mature 
character and become black after the others ; on the other hand, in 
the two species just named the wing-feathers become blue before 
the others. The most probable view with reference to the cases in 
the present class is that the males, differently from what occurs in 
Class I., have transmitted their colours to their male offspring at an 
earlier age than that at which they were first acquired ; for, if the 
males had varied whilst quite young, their characters would 
probably have been transmitted to both sexes.^* 

In Aithurus poJytmus, a humming-bird, the male is splendidly 
colomed black and green, and two of the tail-feathers are immensely 
lengthened ; the female has an ordinary tail and inconspicuous 
colours ; now the young males, instead of resembling the adult 
female, in accordance with the common rule, begin from the first to 
assume the colours proper to their sex, and their tail-feathers soon 
become elongated. I owe this information to Mr. Gould, who has 
given me the following more striking and as yet unpublished case. 
Two humming-birds belonging to the genus Eustephanus, both 
beautifully coloured, inhabit the small island of Juan Fernandez, 
and have always been ranked as specifically distinct. But it has 
lately been ascertained that the one which is of a rich chestnut- 
brown colour with a golden-red head, is the male, whilst the other 
which is elegantly variegated with green and white with a metallic 
green head is ths female. Now the young from the first somewhat 
resemble the adults of the corresponding sex, the resemblance 
gradually becoming more and more complete. 


Mr. C. A. Wright, in ‘Ibis,’ 
vol. vi. 1864, p. 65. Jerdon, 
‘ Birds of India,’ vol. i. p. 515. 
See also on the blackbird, Bl.yth 
in Charlesworth*s ‘Mag. of Nat. 
History,’ vol. i. 1837, p. 113. 

The following additional 
cases may be mentioned ; the 
young males of Tanagra rubra 
can be distinguished from the 
young females (Audubon, ‘ Or- 
nith. Biography,’ vol. iv. p. 392), 


and so it is within the nestlings 
of a bine nuthatch, Dendrophila 
frontalis of India (Jerdon, ‘Birds 
of India,’ vol. i. p. 389). Mr. 
Blyth also informs me that the 
sexes of the stonechat, Saxicola 
rubkola, are distinguishable at 
a very early age. Mr. Sal v in 
gives (Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1870 
p. 206), the case of a humming- 
bird, like the following one of 
Eustephanus. 


744 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


In considering this last case, if as before we take the plumage of 
the young as our guide, it would appear that both sexes have been 
rendered beautiful independently ; and not that one sex has 
partially transferred its beauty to the other. The male apparently 
has acquired his bright colours through sexual selection in the same 
manner as, for instance, the peacock or pheasant in our first class 
of cases ; and the female in the same manner as the female Ehyncheea 
or Turnix in our second class of cases. But there is much difficulty 
in understanding how this could have been effected at the same time 
with the two sexes of ithe same species. Mr. Salvin states, as we 
have seen in the eighth chapter, that with certain humming birds 
the males greatly exceed the females in number, whilst with other 
species inhabiting the same country the females greatly exceed the 
males. If, then, we might assume that during some former length- 
ened period the m ales of the Juan Fernandez species had greatly 
exceeded the females in number, but that during another lengthened 
period the females had far exceeded the males, we could understand 
how the males at one time, and the females at another, might have 
been rendered beautiful by the selection of the brighter coloured 
individuals of either sex ; both sexes transmitting their characters 
to their young at a rather earlier age than usual. Whether this is 
the true explanation I will not pretend to say ; but the case is too 
remarkable to be passed over without notice. 

We have now seen in all six classes, that an intimate 
relation exists between the plumage of the young and 
the adults, either of one sex or both. These relations 
are fairly well explained on the principle that one 
sex — this being in the great majority of cases the male 
— first acquired though variation and sexual selection 
bright colours or other ornaments, and transmitted 
them in various ways, in accordance with the re- 
cognised laws of inheritance. Why variations have 
occurred at dififerent periods of life, even sometimes 
with species of the same group, we do not know, but 
with respect to the form of transmission, one important 
determining cause seems to be the age at which the 
variations first appear. 


Chap. XVI. BIRDS— COLOUR AND PROTECTION. 745 

From the principle of inheritance at corresponding 
ages, and from any variations in colour which occurred 
in the males at an early age not being then selected — 
on the contrary being often eliminated as dangerous — 
whilst similar variations occurring at or near the period 
of reproduction have been preserved, it follows that 
the plumage of the young will often have been left 
unmodified, or but little modified. We thus get some 
insight into the colouring of the progenitors of our 
existing species. In a vast number of species in five out 
of our six classes of cases, the adults of one sex or of both 
are bright coloured, at least during the breeding-season, 
whilst the young are invariably less brightly coloured 
than the adults, or are quite dull coloured; for no 
instance is known, as far as I can discover, of the young 
of dull-coloured species displaying bright colours, or 
of the young of bright-coloured species being more 
brilliant than their parents. In the fourth class, 
however, in which the young and the old resemble 
each other, there are many species (though by no 
means all), of which the young are bright-coloured, 
and as these form old groups, we may infer that their 
early progenitors were likewise bright. With this 
exception, if we look to the birds of the world, it 
appears that their beauty has been much increased 
since that period, of which their immature plumage 
gives us a partial record. 

On the Colour of the Plumage in relation to Pro- 
tection . — It will have been seen that I cannot follow 
Mr. Wallace in the belief that dull colours, when 
confined to the females, have been in most cases 
specially gained for the sake of protection. There 


746 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IT. 


can, however, be no doubt, as formerly remarked, that 
both sexes of many birds have bad their colours 
modified, so as to escape the notice of their enemies ; 
or in some instances, so as to approach their prey 
unobserved, just as owls have had their plumage 
rendered soft, that their flight may not be overheard. 
Mr. Wallace remarks'^® that “it is only in the tropics, 
“ among forests which never lose their foliage, that we 
“ find whole groups of birds, whose chief colour is 
“ green.” It will be admitted by every one, who has 
ever tried, how difficult it is to distinguish parrots in a 
leaf-covered tree. Nevertheless, we must remember 
that many parrots are ornamented with crimson, blue, 
and orange tints, which can hardly be protective. 
Woodpeckers are eminently arboreal, but besides green 
species, there are many black, and black-and-white 
kinds — all the species being apparently exposed to 
nearly the same dangers. It is therefore probable 
that with tree-haunting birds, strongly-pronounced 
colours have been acquired through sexual selection, 
but that a green tint has been acquired oftener than 
any other, from the additional advantage of protection. 

In regard to birds which live on the ground, every 
one admits that they are coloured so as to imitate the 
surrounding surface. How difficult it is to see a 
partridge, snipe, woodcock, certain plovers, larks, and 
night-jars when crouched on ground. Animals in- 
habiting deserts offer the most striking cases, for the 
bare surface affords no concealment, and nearly all the 
smaller quadrupeds, reptiles, and birds depend for 
safety on their colours. Mr. Tristram has remarked 
in regard to the inhabitants of the Sahara, that all 
^ ‘ Westminster Review,’ July, 18G7, p. 5. 


Chap. XVI. BIKDS— COLOUR AND PROTECTION. 747 

are protected by their “ isabelline or sand-colour.” 
Calling to my recollection the desert-birds of South 
America, as well as most of the ground-birds of Great 
Britain, it appeared to me that both sexes in such 
cases are generally coloured nearly alike. Accordingly, 
I applied to Mr. Tristram with respect to the birds of 
the Sahara, and he has kindly given me the following 
information. There are twenty-six species belonging 
to fifteen genera, which manifestly have their plumage 
coloured in a protective manner ; and this colouring is 
all the more striking, as with most of these birds it 
differs from that of their congeners. Both sexes of 
thirteen out of the twenty-six species are coloured in 
the same manner ; but these belong to genera in which 
this rule commonly prevails, so that they tell us 
nothing about the protective colours being the same in 
both sexes of desert-birds. Of the other thirteen 
species, three belong to genera in which the sexes 
usually differ from each other, yet here they have the 
sexes alike. In the remaining ten species, the male 
differs from the female ; but the difference is confined 
chiefly to the under surface of the plumage, which is 
concealed when the bird crouches on the ground ; the 
head and back being of the same sand-coloured hue in 
the two sexes. So that in these ten species the upper 
surfaces of both sexes have been acted on and rendered 
alike, through natural selection, for the sake of pro- 
tection ; whilst the lower surfaces of the males alone 
have been diversified, through sexual selection, for the 
sake of ornament. Here, as both sexes are equally 

^ ‘ Ibis,’ 1859, vol. i. p. 429, according to his experience of 
et seq. Dr. Rohlfs, however, the Sahara, this statement is iw 
remarks to me in a letter that strong. 


748 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut II. 


well protected, we clearly see that the females have 
not been prevented by natural selection from inheriting 
the colours of their male parents ; so that we must 
look to the law of sexually-limited transmission. 

In all parts of the world both sexes of many soft- 
, billed birds, especially those which frequent reeds or 
sedges, are obscurely coloured. No doubt if their 
colours had been brilliant, they would have been much 
more conspicuous to their enemies ; but whether their 
dull tints have been specially gained for the sake of 
protection seems, as far as I can judge, rather doubtful. 
It is still more doubtful whether such dull tints can 
have been gained for the sake of ornament. We must, 
however, bear in mind that male birds, though dull- 
coloured, often differ much from their females (as with 
the common sparrow), and this leads to the belief that 
such colours have been gained through sexual selection, 
from being attractive. Many of the soft-billed birds 
are songsters ; and a discussion in a former chapter 
should not be forgotten, in which it was shewn that 
the best songsters are rarely ornamented with bright 
tints. It would appear that female birds, as a general 
rule, have selected their mates either for their sweet 
voices or gay. colours, but not for both charms com- 
bined. Some species, which are manifestly coloured 
for the sake of protection, such as the jack-snipe, 
woodcock, and night-jar, are likewise marked and 
shaded, according to our standard of taste, with extreme 
elegance. In such cases we may conclude that both 
. natural and sexual selection have acted conjointly for 
protection and ornament. Whether any bird exists 
which does not possess some special attraction, by 
which to charm the opposite sex, may be doubted. 


Chap. XVI. BIKDS — CONSPICUOUS COLOURS. 749 

When both sexes are so obscurely coloured that it 
would be rash to assume the agency of sexual selection, 
and when no direct evidence can be advanced shewing 
that such colours serve as a protection, it is best to 
own complete ignorance of the cause, or, which comes 
to nearly the same thing, to attribute the result to the 
direct action of the conditions of life. 

Both sexes of many birds are conspicuously, though 
not brilliantly coloured, such as the numerous black, 
white, or piebald species ; and these colours are pro- 
bably the result of sexual selection. With the common 
blackbird, capercailzie, blackcock, black scoter-duck 
(Oidemia), and even with one of the birds of paradise 
(Lophorina atra), the males alone are black, whilst the 
females are brown or mottled ; and there can hardly 
be a doubt that blackness in these cases has been a 
sexually selected character. Therefore it is in some 
degree probable that the complete or partial blackness 
of both sexes in such birds as crows, certain cockatoos, 
storks, and swans, and many marine birds, is likewise 
the result of sexual selection, accompanied by equal 
transmission to both sexes ; for blackness can hardly 
serve in any case as a protection. With several birds, 
in which the male alone is black, and in others in which 
both sexes are black, the beak or skin about the head 
is brightly coloured, and the contrast thus afforded 
adds much to their beauty ; we see this in the bright 
yellow beak of the male blackbird, in the crimson skin 
over the eyes of the blackcock and capercailzie, in the 
brightly and variously coloured beak of the scoter- 
drake (Oidemia), in the red beak of the chough (Corvus 
graculus, Linn.), of the black swan, and the black stork. 
This leads me to remark that it is not incredible that 


750 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


toucans may owe the enormous size of their beaks 
to sexual selection, for the sake of displaying the 
diversified and vivid stripes of colour, with which 
these organs are ornamented.®^ The naked skin, also, 
at the base of the beak and round the eyes is likewise 
often brilliantly coloured ; and Mr. Gould, in speaking 
of one species,®^ says that the colours of the beak “ are 
“ doubtless in the finest and most brilliant state during 
the time of pairing.” There is no greater improba- 
bility that toucans should be encumbered with immense 
beaks, though rendered as light as possible by their 
cancellated structure, for the display of fine colours 
(an object falsely appearing to us unimportant), than 
that the male Argus pheasant and some other birds 
should be encumbered with plumes so long as to impede 
their flight. 

In the same manner, as the males alone of various 
species are black, the females being dull-coloured ; so 
in a few cases the males alone are either wholly or 
partially white, as with the several bell -birds of 
South America (Chasmorhynchus), the Antarctic goose 


“ No satisfactory explanation 
has ever been offered of the 
immense size, and still less of 
the bright colours, of the toucan’s 
beak. Mr. Bates (‘The Natu- 
ralist on the Amazons,’ vol. ii. 
1863, p. 341) states that they 
use their beaks for reaching 
fruit at the extreme tips of the 
branches ; and likewise, as stated 
by other authors, for extract- 
ing eggs and young birds from 
the nests of other birds. But, 
as Mr. Bates admits, the beak 
“ can scarcely be considei ed a 
“very perfectly-fonned instru- 


“ ment for the end to which it 
“ is applied.” The great bulk 
of the beak, as shewn by its 
breadth, depth, as well as length, 
is not intelligible on the view, 
that it serves merely as an organ 
of prehension. Mr. Belt believes 
(‘ The Naturalist in Nicaragua,’ 
p. 197), that the principal use of 
the beak is as a defence against 
enemies, especially to the female 
whilst nesting in a hole in a 
tree. 

“ Bhamphastos carinatui 
Gould’s ‘Monograph of Bam- 
phastidse.’ 


Chap. XVI. BIRDS— CONSPICUOUS COLOURS. 


751 


{Bernida antarctica)^ the silver- pheasant, &c., whilst 
the females are brown or obscurely mottled. There- 
fore, on the same principle as before, it is probable that 
both sexes of many birds, such as white cockatoos, 
several egrets with their beautiful plumes, certain 
ibises, gulls, terns, &c., have acquired their more or 
less completely white plumage through sexual selection. 
In some of these cases the plumage becomes white only 
at maturity. This is the case with certain gannets, 
tropic-birds, &c., and with the snow-goose {Anser 
hyperhoreus). As the latter breeds on the “barren 
“ grounds,” when not covered with snow, and as it mi- 
grates southward during the winter, there is no reason 
to suppose that its snow-white adult plumage serves as 
a protection. In the Anastomus oscitans, we have still 
better evidence that the white plumage is a nuptial 
character, for it is developed only during the summer ; 
the young in their immature state, and the adults in 
their winter dress, being grey and black. With many 
kinds of gulls (Larus), the head and neck become pure 
white during the summer, being grey or mottled during 
the winter and in the young state. On the other hand, 
with the smaller gulls, or sea-mews (Gavia), and with 
some terns (Sterna), exactly the reverse occurs ; for 
the heads of the young birds during the first year, and 
of the adults during the winter, are either pure white, 
or much paler coloured than during the breeding- 
season. These latter cases offer another instance of 
the capricious manner in which sexual selection appears 
often to have acted.®^ 

On Lams, Gavia, and Ster- dubon, ‘ Ornith. Biography,’ vol. 
na, see Macgillivray, ‘ Hist. Brit. iv. p. 562. On the Anastomus, 
Birds,’ vol. v. pp. 515, 584, 626. Mr. Blyth, in ‘ Ibis,’ 1867, p. 
On the Anser hyperboreus, Au- 173. 


752 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


That aquatic birds have acquired a white plumage 
so much oftener than terrestrial birds, probably depends 
on their large size and strong powers of flight, so that 
they can easily defend themselves or escape from birds 
of prey, to which moreover they are not much exposed. 
Consequently, sexual selection has not here been inter- 
fered with or guided for the sake of protection. No 
doubt with birds which roam over the open ocean, the 
males and females could find each other much more 
easily, when made conspicuous either by being per- 
fectly white or intensely black ; so that these colours 
may possibly serve the same end as the call-notes of 
many land-birds.^'^ A white or black bird when it 
discovers and flies down to a carcase floating on the sea 
or cast up on the beach, will be seen from a great dis- 
tance, and will guide other birds of the same and other 
species, to the prey ; but as this would be a disadvan- 
tage to the first finders, the individuals which were the 
whitest or blackest would not thus procure more food 
than the less strongly coloured individuals. Hence 
conspicuous colours cannot have been gradually acquired 
for this purpose through natural selection. 

As sexual selection depends on so fluctuating an 
element as taste, we can understand how it is that, 
within the same group of birds having nearly the same 
habits, there should exist white or nearly white, as well 
as black, or nearly black species, — for instance, both 
white and black cockatoos, storks, ibises, swans, terns. 

It may be noticed that with others are black. So that here 
vultures, which roam far and again conspicuous colours may 
wide high in the air, like marine possibly aid the sexes in finding 
birds over the ocean, three or each other during the breeding- 
four species are almost wholly season, 
or largely white, and that many 


Chap. XVI. 


BIRDS — NOVELTY ADMIRED. 


753 


and petrels. Piebald birds likewise sometimes occur 
in the same groups together with black and white 
species; for instance, the black-necked swan, certain 
terns, and the common magpie. That a strong contrast 
in colour is agreeable to birds, we may conclude by 
looking through any large collection, for the sexes 
often differ from each other in the male having the 
pale parts of a purer white, and the variously coloured 
dark parts of still darker tints than the female. 

It would even appear that mere novelty, or slight 
changes for the sake of change, have sometimes acted 
on female birds as a charm, like changes of fashion 
with us. Thus the males of some parrots can hardly 
be said to be more beautiful than the females, at least 
according to our taste, but they differ in such points, 
as in having a rose-coloured collar instead of “a bright 
“ emeraldine narrow green collar or in the male having 
a black collar instead of “ a yellow demi-collar in front,” 
with a pale roseate instead of a plum-blue head.®® As 
so many male birds have elongated tail-feathers or 
elongated crests for their chief ornament, the shortened 
tail, formerly described in the male of a humming-bird, 
and the shortened crest of the male goosander, seem 
like one of the many changes of fashion which we 
admire in our own dresses. 

Some members of the heron family offer a still more 
curious case of novelty in colouring having, as it ap- 
pears, been appreciated for the sake of novelty. The 
young of the Ardea aslia are white, the adults being 
dark slate-coloured ; and not only the young, but the 
adults in their winter plumage, of the allied Bujphus 

“ See JerdoH on the genus Pala?ornis, ‘ Birds of India,' toI. i 
pp. 258-260. 

3 G 


754 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


I’AUT II 


coromandus are white, this colour changing into a rich 
golden-buff during the breeding-season. It is incred- 
ible that the young of these two species, as well as of 
some other members of the same family,®® should for 
any special purpose have been rendered pure white and 
, thus made conspicuous to their enemies; or that the 
adults of one of these two species should have been 
specially rendered white during the winter in a country 
which is never covered with snow. On the other hand 
we have good reason to believe that whiteness has been 
gained by many birds as a sexual ornament. We may 
therefore conclude that some early progenitor of the 
Ardea asha and the Buphus acquired a white plumage 
for nuptial purposes, and transmitted this colour to 
their young ; so that the young and the old became 
white like certain existing egrets ; and that the white- 
ness was afterwards retained by the young, whilst it 
was exchanged by the adults for more strongly-pro- 
nounced tints. But if we could look still further back 
to the still earlier progenitors of these two species, we 
should probably see the adults dark-coloured. I infer 
that this would be the case, from the analogy of many 
other birds, which are dark whilst young, and when 
adult are white ; and more especially from the case of 
the Ardea gularis, the colours of which are the reverse 
of those of A. asha, for the young are dark-coloured and 
the adults white, the young having retained a former 
state of plumage. It appears therefore that, during a 

^ The young of Ardea rufes- vol. iii. p. 416 ; vol. iv. p. 58) 
cens aud A. ccerulea of the U. seems rather pleased at the 
States are likewise white, the thought that this remarkable 
adults being colouied in accord- change of plumage will ^eatly 
ance with their specific name? “ disconcert the systema lists.” 
Audubon (‘ Ornith. Biography ' 


CIIAI*. XVI. BIKDS— NOVP^LTY ADMIRED. 


755 


long line of descent, the adult progenitors of the Ardea 
asha, the Buphus, and of some allies, have undergone 
the following changes of colour : first, a dark shade ; 
secondly, pure white ; and thirdly, owing to another 
change of fashion (if I may so express myself), their 
present slaty, reddish, or golden-buff tints. These 
successive changes are intelligible only on the principle 
of novelty having been admired by birds for its own 
sake. 

Several writers have objected to the whole theory of 
sexual selection, by assuming that with animals and 
savages the taste of the female for certain colours or 
other ornaments would not remain constant for many 
generations; that first one colour and then another 
would be admired, and consequently that no permanent 
effect could be produced. We may admit that taste is 
fluctuating, but it is not quite arbitrary. It depends 
much on habit, as we see in mankind; and we may 
infer that this would hold good with birds and other 
animals. Even in our own dress, the general character 
lasts long, and the changes are to a certain extent 
graduated. Abundant evidence will be given in two 
places in a future chapter, that savages of many races 
have admired for many generations the same cicatrices 
on the skin, the same hideously perforated lips, nostrils, 
or ears, distorted heads, Ac. ; and these deformities 
present some analogy to the natural ornaments of 
various animals. Nevertheless, with savages such 
fashions do not endure for ever, as we may infer from 
the differences in this respect between allied tribes on • 
the same continent. So again the raisers of fancy 
animals certainly have admired for many generations 
and still admire the same breeds ; they earnestly desire 


756 


thp: descent op^ man. 


Paut. II. 


slight changes, which are considered as improvements, 
but any great or sudden change is looked at as the 
greatest blemish. With birds in a state of nature we 
have no reason to suppose that they would admire 
an entirely new style of coloration, even if great and 
sudden variations often occurred, which is far from being 
the case. We know that dovecot pigeons do not 
willingly associate with the variously coloured fancy 
breeds ; that albino birds do not commonly get partners 
in marriage ; and that the black ravens of the Feroe 
Islands chase away their piebald brethren. But this 
dislike of a sudden change would not preclude their 
appreciating slight changes, any more than it does in 
the case of man. Hence with respect to taste, which 
depends on many elements, but partly on habit and 
partly on a love of novelty, there seems no improba- 
bility in animals admiring for a very long period the 
same general style of ornamentation or other attractions, 
and yet appreciating slight changes in colours, form, or 
sound. 

Summary of the Four Ghaiyters on Birds , — Most male 
birds are highly pugnacious during the breeding-season, 
and some possess weapons adapted for fighting with 
their rivals. But the most pugnacious and the best 
armed males rarely or never depend for success solely 
on their power to drive away or kill their rivals, but 
have special means for charming the female. With 
some it is the power of song, or of giving forth strange 
• cries, or instrumental music, and the males in conse- 
quence difier from the females in their vocal organs, or 
in the structure of certain feathers. From the curi- 
ously diversified means for producing various sounds, we 


Chap. XVI. 


BIRDS —SUMMARY. 


757 


gain a high idea of the importance of this means of 
courtship. Many birds endeavour to charm the females 
by love-dances or antics, performed on the ground or 
in the air, and sometimes at prepared places. But 
ornaments of many kinds, the most brilliant tints, 
combs and wattles, beautiful plumes, elongated feathers, 
top-knots, and so forth, are by far the commonest 
means. In some cases mere novelty appears to have 
acted as a charm. The ornaments of the males must 
be highly important to them, for they have been 
acquired in not a few cases at the cost of increased 
danger from enemies, and even at some loss of power in 
fighting with their rivals. The males of very many 
species do not assume their ornamental dress until 
they arrive at maturity, or they assume it only during 
the breeding-season, or the tints then become more 
vivid. Certain ornamental appendages become enlarged, 
turgid, and brightly coloured during the act of court- 
ship. The males display their charms with elaborate 
care and to the best effect; and this is done in the 
presence of the females. The courtship is sometimes a 
prolonged affair, and many males and females congregate 
at an appointed place. To suppose that the females do 
not appreciate the beauty of the males, is to admit that 
their splendid decorations, all their pomp and display, 
are useless; and this is incredible. Birds have fine 
powers of discrimination, and in some few instances it 
can be shewn that they have a taste for the beautiful. 
The females, moreover, are known occasionally to ex • 
hibit a marked preference or antipathy for certain 
individual males. 

If it be admitted that the females prefer, or are 
unconsciously excited by the more beautiful males, 


758 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


then the males would slowly but surely be rendered 
more and more attractive through sexual selection. 
That it is this sex which has been chiefly modified, we 
may infer from the fact that, in almost ever}^ genus 
where the sexes differ, the males differ much more 
from one another than do the females; this is well 
shewn in certain closely-allied representative species, 
in which the females can hardly be distinguished, 
whilst the males are quite distinct. Birds in a state 
of nature offer individual differences which would 
amply suffice for the work of sexual selection ; but we 
have seen that they occasionally present more strongly 
marked variations which recur so frequently that they 
would immediately be fixed, if they served to allure 
the female. The laws of variation must determine the 
nature of the initial changes, and will have largely 
influenced the final result. The gradations, which 
may be observed between the males of allied species, 
indicate the nature of the steps through which they 
have passed. They explain also in the most inter- 
esting manner how certain characters have originated, 
such as the indented ocelli on the tail-feathers of the 
peacock, and the ball-and-socket ocelli on the wing- 
feathers of the Argus pheasant. It is evident that the 
brilliant colours, top-knots, fine plumes, &c., of many 
male birds cannot have been acquired as a protection ; 
indeed, they sometimes lead to danger. That they 
are not due to the direct and definite action of the 
conditions of life, we may feel assured, because the 
females have been exposed to the same conditions, and 
yet often differ from the males to an extreme degree. 
Although it is probable that changed conditions acting 
during a lengthened period have in some cases produced 


Chap. XVI. 


BIRDS — SUMMARY. 


759 


a definite effect on both sexes, or sometimes on one 
sex alone, the more important result will have been an 
increased tendency to vary or to present more strongly- 
marked individual differences ; and such differences 
will have afforded an excellent ground-work for the 
action of sexual selection. 

The laws of inheritance, irrespectively of selection, 
appear to have determined whether the characters 
acquired by the males for the sake of ornament, for 
producing various sounds, and for fighting together, 
have been transmitted to the males alone or to both 
sexes, either permanently, or periodically during 
certain seasons of the year. Why various characters 
should have been transmitted sometimes in one 'way 
and sometimes in another, is not in most cases known ; 
but the period of variability seems often to have been 
the determining cause. When the two sexes have 
inherited all characters in common they necessarily 
resemble each other ; but as the successive variations 
may be differently transmitted, every possible gradation 
may be found, even within the same genus, from the 
closest similarity to the widest dissimilarity between 
the sexes. With many closely-allied species, follow- 
ing nearly the same habits of life, the males have come 
to differ from each other chiefly through the action 
of sexual selection ; whilst the females have come 
to differ chiefly from partaking more or less of the 
characters thus acquired by the males. The effects, 
moreover, of the definite action of the conditions of 
life, will not have been masked in the females, as in 
the males, by the accumulation through sexual selection 
of strongly-pronounced colours and other ornaments. 
The individuals of both sexes, however affected, will 


760 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IT. 


have been kept at each successive period nearly uniform 
by the free intercrossing of many individuals. 

With species, in which the sexes differ in colour, it 
is possible or probable that some of the successive 
variations often tended to be transmitted equally to 
both sexes ; but that when this occurred the females 
were prevented from acquiring the bright colours of 
the males, by the destruction which they suffered 
during incubation. There is no evidence that it is 
possible by natural selection to convert one form of 
transmission into another. But there would not be 
the least difficulty in rendering a female dull-coloured, 
the male being still kept bright-coloured, by the 
selection of successive variations, which were from the 
first limited in their transmission to the same sex. 
Whether the females of many species have actually 
been thus modified, must at present remain doubtful. 
When, through the law of the equal transmission of 
characters to both sexes, the females were rendered as 
conspicuously coloured as the males, their instincts 
appear often to have been modified so that they were 
led to build domed or concealed nests. 

In one small and curious class of cases the characters 
and habits of the two sexes have been completely 
transposed, for the females are larger, stronger, more 
vociferous and brighter coloured than the males. They 
have, also, become so quarrelsome that they often 
fight together for the possession of the males, like the 
males of other pugnacious species for the possession 
of the females. If, as seems probable, such females 
habitually drive away their rivals, and by the display 
of their bright colours or other charms endeavour to 
attract the males, we can understand how it is that 


Chap. XVI. 


BIRDS — SUMMARY. 


761 


they have gradually been rendered, by sexual selection 
and sexually-limited transmission, more beautiful than 
the males — the latter being left unmodified or only 
slightly modified. 

Whenever the law of inheritance at corresponding 
ages prevails but not that of sexually-limited trans- 
mission, then if the parents vary late in life — and we 
know that this constantly occurs with our poultry, and 
occasionally with other birds — the young will be left 
unaffected, whilst the adults of both sexes will he 
modified. If both these laws of inheritance prevail and 
either sex varies late in life, that sex alone will he 
modified, the other sex and the young being unaffected. 
When variations in brightness or in other conspicuous 
characters occur early in life, as no doubt often happens, 
they will not be acted on through sexual selection 
until the period of reproduction arrives ; consequently 
if dangerous to the young, they will be eliminated 
through natural selection. Thus we can understand 
how it is that variations arising late in life have so 
often been preserved for the ornamentation of the 
males ; the females and the young being left almost 
unaffected, and therefore like each other. With 
species having a distinct summer and winter plumage, 
the males of which either resemble or differ from the 
females during both seasons or during the summer 
alone, the degrees and kinds of resemblance between 
the young and the old are exceedingly complex ; and 
this complexity apparently depends on characters, first 
acquired by the males, being transmitted in various 
ways and degrees, as limited by age, sex, and season. 

As the young of so many species have been but 
little modified in colour and in other ornaments, we are 


762 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


enabled to form some judgment with respect to the 
plumage of their early progenitors ; and we may infer 
that the beauty of our existing species, if we look to 
the whole class, has been largely increased since that 
period, of which the immature plumage gives us an 
indirect record. Many birds, especially those which 
live much on the ground, have undoubtedly been 
obscurely coloured for the sake of protection. In some 
instances the upper exposed surface of the plumage has 
been thus coloured in both sexes, whilst the lower 
surface in the males alone has been variously orna- 
mented through sexual selection. Finally, from the 
facts given in these four chapters, we may conclude 
that weapons for battle, organs for producing sound, 
ornaments of many kinds, bright and conspicuous 
colours, have generally been acquired by the males 
through variation and sexual selection, and have been 
transmitted in various ways according to the several 
laws of inheritance — the females and the young being 
left comparatively but little modified.^^ 


I am greatly indebted to the 
kindness of Mr. Sclater for 
having looked over these four 
chapters on birds, and the tvro 
following ones on mammals. In 
this way I have been saved from 
making mistakes about the 
names of the species, and from 


stating anything as a fact which 
is known to this distinguished 
naturalist to be erroneous. But 
of course he is not at all answer- 
able for the accuracy of the 
statements quote'd by me from 
various authorities. 


. Ckaf. XVII. 


THE DESCENT OF MAN 


763 


CHAPTER XYII. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals. 

The law of battle— Special weapons, confined to the males— Cause 
of absence of weapons in the female — Weapons common to both 
sexes, yet primarily acquired by the male — Other uses of such 
weapons — Their high importance — Greater size of the male — 
Means of defence — On the preference shown by either sex in the 
pairing of quadrupeds. 

With mammals the male appears to win the female 
much more through the law of battle than through 
the display of his charms. The most timid animals, 
not provided with any special weapons for fighting, 
engage in desperate conflicts during the season of love. 
Two male hares have been seen to fight together until 
one was killed ; male moles often fight, and sometimes 
with fatal results; male squirrels engage in frequent 
contests, “ and often wound each other severely ; as 
tlo male beavers, -so that “ hardly a skin is without 
“ scars.” ^ I observed the same fact with the hides of 
the guanacoes in Patagonia'; and on one occasion 
several were so absorbed in fighting that they fear- 

^ See Waterton’s account of man, ‘ Viviparous Quadrupeds of 
two bares fighting, ‘ Zoologist,’ N. America,’ 1846, p. 26k On 

vol. i. 1843, p. 211. On moles, beavers, Mr. A. II. Green, in 

Bell, ‘Hist, of British Quadru- ‘Journal of Lin. Soc. Zoolog.* 

peds,’ 1st edit. p. 100. On vol. x. 1869, p. 362. 

squirrels, Audubon and Bach- 


764 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II, 


lessly rnslied close by me. Livingstone speaks of the 
males of the many animals in Southern Africa as 
almost invariably shewing the scars received in former 
contests. 

The law of battle prevails with aquatic as with 
terrestrial mammals. It is notorious how desperately 
male seals fight, both with their teeth and claws, 
during the breeding-season ; and their hides are like- 
wise often covered with scars. Male sperm-whales are 
very jealous at this season ; and in their battles “ they 
‘‘often lock their jaws together, and turn on their 
“ sides and twist about ; ” so that their lower jaws 
often become distorted.^ 

All male animals which are furnished with special 
weapons for fighting, are well known to engage in 
fierce battles. The courage and the desperate conflicts 
of stags have often been described; their skeletons 
have been found in various parts of the world, with the 
horns inextricably locked together, showing how 
miserably the victor and vanquished had perished.^ 
No animal in the world is so dangerous as an elephant 
in must. Lord Tankerville has given me a graphic 
description of the battles between the wild bulls in 
Chillingham Park, the descendants, degenerated in 
size but not in courage, of the gigantic Bos primigenius. 


^ On the battles of seals, see 
Capt. C. Abbott in ‘ Proc. 
Zool. Soc.’ 1868, p. 191; also 
Mr. R. Brown, ibid. 1868, p. 
436 ; also L. Lloyd, ‘ Game 
Birds of Sweden,’ 1867, p. 412 ; 
also Pennant. On the sperm- 
whale see Mr. J. H. Thompson, 
in ‘Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1867, p. 
246. 

^ See Scrope (‘ Art of Deer- 


stalking,’ p. 17) on the locking 
of the horns with the Oervus 
elaphus. Richardson, in ‘ Fauna 
Bor. Americana,’ 1829, p. 252, 
says that the wapiti, moose, and 
reindeer have been found thus 
locked together. Sir A. Smith 
found at the Cape of Good Hope 
the skeletons of two gnus in the 
same condition. 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — LAW OF BATTLE. 


765 


In 1861 several contended for mastery; and it was 
observed that two of the younger bulls attacked in 
concert the old leader of the herd, overthrow and dis- 
abled him, so that he was believed by the keepers to 
be lying mortally wounded in a neighbouring wood. 
But a few days afterwards one of the young bulls 
approached the wood alone ; and then the “ monarch 
“ of the chase,” who had been lashing himself up for 
• vengeance, came out and, in a short time, killed his 
antagonist. He then quietly joined the herd, and 
long held undisputed sway. Admiral Sir B. J. 
Sulivan informs me that, when he lived in the Falk- 
land Islands, he imported a young English stallion, 
which frequented the hills near Port William with 
eight mares. On these hills there were two wild 
stallions, each with a small troup of mares ; “ and it is 
“certain that these stallions would never have ap- 
“ preached each other without fighting. Both had 
“ tried singly to fight the English horse and drive 
“ away his mares, but had failed. One day they came 
“ in together and attacked him. This was seen by the 
“ capitan who had charge of the horses, and who, on 
“ riding to the spot, found one of the two stallions 
“ engaged with the English horse, whilst the other 
“ was driving away the mares, and had already 
“ separated four from the rest. The capitan settled 
“ the matter by driving the whole party into the 
“corral, for the wild stallions would not leave the 
“ mares.” 

Male animals which are provided with efiicient 
cutting or tearing teeth for the ordinary purposes ol 
life, such as the carnivora, insectivora, and rodents, are 
seldom furnished with weapons especially adapted for 


766 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IT, 


fighting with their rivals. The case is very diflferent 
with the males of many other animals. We see this in 
the horns of stags and of certain kinds of antelopes in 
which the females are hornless. With many animals 
the canine teeth in the upper or lower jaw, or in both, 
are much larger in the males than in the females, or 
are absent in the latter, with the exception sometimes 
of a hidden rudiment. Certain antelopes, the musk- 
deer, camel, horse, hoar, various apes, seals, and the* 
walrus, offer instances. In the females of the walrus 
the tusks are sometimes quite absent."^ In the male 
elephant of India and in the male dugong ^ the upper 
incisors form offensive weapons. In the male narwhal 
the left canine alone is developed into the well-known^ 
spirally-twisted, so-called horn, which is sometimes 
from nine to ten feet in length. It is believed that 
the males use these horns for fighting together ; for 
“ an unbroken one can rarely he got, and occasionally 
“ one may he found with the point of another jammed 
“ into the broken place.” ® The tooth on the opposite 
side of the head in the male consists of a rudiment 
about ten inches in length, which is embedded in the 
jaw ; but sometimes, though rarely, both are equally 
developed on the two sides. In the female both are 


* Mr. Lament (‘ Seasons with 
the Sea-Horses,’ 1861, p. 143) 
says that a good tusk of the 
male walrus weighs 4 pounds, 
and is longer than that of the 
female, which weighs about 3 
jx)unds. The males are des- 
cribed as fighting ferociously. 
On the occasional absence of the 
tusks in the female, see Mr. K. 
Brown, * Pioc. ZooL Soc.’ 1868, 
p. 429. 


® Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Verte- 
brates,’ vol. iii. p. 283. 

® Mr. R. Brown, in ‘Proc. 
Zool. Soc.’ 1869, p. 653. See 
Prof. Turner, in Journal of 
‘ Anat. and Phys.’ 1872, p. 76, 
on the homological nature of 
these’ tusks. Also Mr. J. W. 
Clarke on two tusks being de- 
veloped in the males, in *Proc. 
Zoolog. Soc.’ 1871, p. 42. 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — LAW OF BATTLE. 


76V 


always rudimentary. The male cachalot has a larger 
head than that of the female, and it no doubt aids him 
in his aquatic battles. Lastly, the adult male orni- 
thorhynchus is provided with a remarkable apparatus, 
namely a spur on the foreleg, closely resembling the 
poison-fang of a venomous snake; but according to 
Harting, the secretion from the gland is not poisonous ; 
and on the leg of the female there is a hollow, ap- 
parently for the reception of the spur.’^ 

When the males are provided with weapons which in 
the females are absent, there can be hardly a doubt 
that these serve for fighting with other males ; and 
that they were acquired through sexual selection, and 
were transmitted to the male sex alone. It is not 
probable, at least in most cases, that the females have 
been prevented from acquiring such weapons, on 
account of their being useless, superfluous, or in some 
way injurious. On the contrary, as they are often 
used by the males for various purposes, more especially 
as a defence against their enemies, it is a surprising 
fact that they are so poorly developed, or quite absent, 
in the females of so many animals. With female deer 
the development during each recurrent season of great 
branching horns, and with female elephants the 
development of immense tusks, would be a great waste 
of vital power, supposing that they were of no use to 
the females. Consequently, they would have tended 
to be eliminated in the female through natural selec- 
tion ; that is, if the successive variations were limited 
in their transmission to the female sex, for otherwise the 

’ Owen on tlie cachalot and by Dr. Zouteveeu in the Dutch 
Ornithorhynchus, ibid. vol. iii. tran-slat. of this work, vol. ii. 
pp. 638, 641. Harting is quoted p. 292. 


768 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


weapons of the males would have been injuriously 
affected, and this would have been a greater evil. On 
the whole, and from the consideration of the fol- 
lowing facts, it seems probable that when the various 
weapons differ in the two sexes, this has generally 
depended on the kind of transmission which has 
prevailed. 

As the reindeer is the one species in the whole 
family of Deer, in which the female is furnished with 
horns, though they are somewhat smaller, thinner, and 
less branched than in the male, it might naturally be 
thought that, at least in this case, they must be of 
some special service to her. The female retains her 
horns from the time when they are fully developed, 
namely, in September, throughout the winter until 
April or May, when she brings forth her young. Mr. 
Crotch made particular enquiries for me in Norway, 
and it appears that the females at this season conceal 
themselves for about a fortnight in order to bring 
forth their young, and then reappear, generally horn- 
less. In Nova Scotia, however, as I hear from Mr. 
H. Eeeks, the female sometimes retains her horns 
longer. The male on the other hand casts his horns 
much earlier, towards the end of November. As both 
sexes have the same requirements and follow the same 
habits of life, and as the male is destitute of horns 
during the winter, it is improbable that they can be of 
any special service to the female during this season, 
which includes the larger part of the time during 
which she is horned. Nor is it probable that she can 
have inherited horns from some ancient progenitor of 
the family of deer, for, from the fact of the females of 
so many species in all quarters of the globe not having 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS— LAW OF BATTLE. 769 

horns, we may conclude that this was the primordial 
character of the group.^ 

The horns of the reindeer are developed at a most 
unusually early age ; but what the cause of this may 
be is not known. The effect has apparently been the 
transference of the horns to both sexes. We should 
bear in^mind that horns are always transmitted through 
the female, and that she has a latent capacity for their 
development, as we see in old or diseased females.® 
Moreover the females of some other species of deer 
exhibit, either normally or occasionally, rudiments of 
horns ; thus the female of Gervulus moschatus has 
“ bristly tufts, ending in a knob, instead of a horn ; ” 
and “ in most specimens of the female wapiti (Cervus 
“ canadensis) there is a sharp bony protuberance in the 
“ place of the horn.” From these several con- 
siderations we may conclude that the possession of 
fairly well-developed horns by the female reindeer, is 
due to the males having first acquired them as weapons 
for fighting with other males ; and secondarily to their 
development from some unknown cause at an unusually 


* On the structure and shed- 
ding of the horns of the rein- 
deer, HoflFberg, ‘ Amoenitates 
Acad.’ vol. iv. 1788, p. 149. See 
Richardson, ‘ Fauna Bor. Ameri- 
cana,’ p. 241, in regard to the 
American variety or species : 
also Major W. Ross King, ‘ The 
Sportsman in Canada,’ 1866, 

p. 80. 

® Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire, 
‘ Essais de Zoolog. Generale,’ 
1841, p. 513. Other masculine 
characters, besides the horns, 
are sometimes similarly trans- 
ferred to the female; thus Mr. 


Boner, in speaking of an old 
female chamois (‘ Chamois Hunt- 
ing in the Mountains of Bavaria,’ 
1860, 2nd edit. p. 363), says, 
“not only was the head very 
“male-looking, but along the 
“ back there was a ridge of long 
“ hair, usually to be found only 
“in bucks.” 

On the Cervulus, Dr. Gray, 
‘ Catalogue of Mammalia in the 
British Museum,’ part hi. p. 220. 
On the Cervus canadensis or, 
wapiti, see Hon. J. D. Caton, 
‘ Ottawa Acad, of Nat. Sciences,’ 
May, 1868, p. 9. 

3 D 


770 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut II. 


early age in the males, and their consequent transfer- 
ence to both sexes. 

Turning to the sheath-horned ruminants : with an- 
telopes a graduated series can he formed, beginning 
with species, the females of which are completely 
destitute of horns — passing on to those which have 
horns so small as to be almost rudimentary, (as with 
the Antilocajpra americana, in which species they are 
present in only one out of four or five females “) — to 
those which have fairly developed horns, but manifestly 
smaller and thinner than in the male and sometimes of 
a difi’erent shape,^^ — and ending with those in which 
both sexes have horns of equal size. As with the rein- 
deer, so with antelopes, there exists, as previously 
shewn, a relation between the period of the develop- 
ment of the horns and their transmission to one or 
both sexes ; it is therefore probable that their presence 
or absence in the females of some species, and their 
more or less perfect condition in the females of other 
species, depends, not on their being of any special use, 
but simply in inheritance. It accords with this view 
that even in the same restricted genus both sexes of 
some species, and the males alone of others, are thus 
provided. It is also a remarkable fact that, although 
the females of Antilojpe hezoartica are normally destitute 
of horns, Mr. Blyth has seen no less than three females 
thus furnished; and there was no reason to suppose 
that they were old or diseased. 

In all the wild species of goats and sheep the horns 

” I am indebted to Dr. Can- the female Ant. euchore resemble 
field for this information, see those of a distinct species, viz. 
also his paper in * Proc. Zoolog. the Ant. dorcas var. Corine^ 
Soc.’ 1866, p. 105. see Desmarcst, ‘ Mammalogie,’ 

>2 For instance the horns of p. 455, 


Chap. XVII MAMMALS— LAW OF BATTLE. 


771 


are larger in the male than in the female, and are 
sometimes quite absent in the latter.^^ In several 
domestic breeds of these two animals, the males alone 
are furnished with horns ; and in some breeds, for 
instance, in the sheep of North Wales, though both 
sexes are properly horned, the ewes are very liable to 
be hornless. I have been informed by a trustworthy 
witness, who purposely inspected a flock of these same 
sheep during the lambing season, that the horns at 
birth are generally more fully developed in the male 
than in the female. Mr. J. Peel crossed his Lonk 
sheep, both sexes of which always bear horns, with 
hornless Leicesters and hornless Shropshire Downs; 
and the result was that the male offspring had their 
horns considerably reduced, whilst the females were 
wholly destitute of them. These several facts indicate 
that, with sheep, the horns are a much less firmly 
fixed character in the females than in the males ; and 
this leads us to look at the horns, as properly of 
masculine origin. 

With the adult musk-ox (Ovibos moschatus) the 
horns of the male are larger than those of the female, 
and in the latter the bases do not touch.^^ In regard 
to ordinary cattle Mr. Blyth remarks : ‘‘ In most of the 
“ wild bovine animals the horns are both longer and 
“ thicker in the bull than in the cow, and in the cow- 
“ banteng (Bos sondaicus) the horns are remarkably 
“ small, and inclined much backwards. In the domestic 
“ races of cattle, both of the humped and humpless 
“ types, the horns are short and thick in the bull, 

“ Gray, ‘ Catalogue Mamm. Kichardson, ‘ Fauna Boy, 

Brit. Mus.* part iii. 1852, p. Americana,’ p. 278, 

ICO. 


772 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


longer and more slender in the cow and ox ; and in 
** the Indian bnflfalo, they are shorter and thicker in the 
“ bull, longer and more slender in the cow. In the 
“ wild gaour (B. gaurus) the horns are mostly both 
“ longer and thicker in the bull than in the cow.” 

^ Dr. Forsyth Major also informs me that a fossil skull, 
believed to be that of the female Bos estruscus, has been 
found in Yal d’Arno, which is wholly without horns. 
In the Rhinoceros simus, as I may add, the horns of the 
female are generally longer but less powerful than in 
the male ; and in some other species of rhinoceros they 
are said to be shorter in the female.^® From these 
various facts we may infer as probable that horns of 
all kinds, even when they are equally developed in 
the two sexes, were primarily acquired by the male 
in order to conquer other males, and have been trans- 
ferred more or less completely to the female. 

The effects of castration deserve notice, as throwing 
light on this same point. Stags after the operation 
never renew their horns. The male reindeer, however, 
must be excepted, as after castration he does renew 
them. This fact, as well as the possession of horns by 
both sexes, seems at first to prove that the horns in 
this species do not constitute a sexual character ; but 
as they are developed at a very early age, before the 
sexes differ in constitution, it is not surprising that 
they should be unaffected by castration, even if they 
were aboriginally acquired by the male. With sheep 
both sexes properly bear horns; and I am informed 

“ ‘ Land and Water,’ 1867, iii. p. 624. 
p. 346. This is the conclusion of 

Sir Andrew Smith,* Zoology Seidlitz, ‘Die Darwinsche 
of S. Africa,’ pi. xix. Owen, Theorie,’ 1871, p. 47. 

‘ Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — LAW OF BATTLE. 


773 


that with Welch sheep the horns of the males are 
considerably reduced by castration; but the degree 
depends much on the age at which the operation is 
performed, as is likewise the case with other animals. 
Merino rams have large horns, whilst the ewes 
“ generally speaking are without horns ; ” and in this 
breed castration seems to produce a somewhat greater 
effect, so that if performed at an early age the horns 
“ remain almost undeveloped.” On the Guinea coast 
there is a breed in which the females never hear horns, 
and, as Mr. Win wood Keade informs me, the rams after 
castration are quite destitute of them. With cattle, 
the horns of the males are much altered by castration ; 
for instead of being short and thick, they become 
longer than those of the cow, but otherwise resemble 
them. The Antilo]pe hezoartica offers a somewhat ana- 
logous case : the males have long straight spiral horns, 
nearly parallel to each other, and directed backwards ; 
the females occasionally bear horns, but these when 
present are of a very different shape, for they are not 
spiral, and spreading widely, bend round with the 
points forwards. Now it is a remarkable fact that, in 
the castrated male, as Mr. Blyth informs me, the horns 
are of the same peculiar shape as in the female, but 
longer and thicker. If we may judge from analogy, 
the female probably shews us, in these two cases of 
cattle and the antelope, the former condition of the 
horns in some early progenitor of each species. But 

I am much obliged to Prof. at an early period, either alto- 
Victor Carus, for having made gether disappear or remain as 
enquiries for me iii Saxony on mere rudiments ; but 1 do not 
this subject. H. von Nathusius know whether he refers to 
(‘ Viehzucht,’ 1872, p. 64) says merinos or to ordinary breeds, 
that the horns of sheep castrated 


774 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


why castration should lead to the reappearance of an 
early condition of the horns cannot be explained with 
any certainty. Nevertheless, it seems probable, that 
in nearly the same manner as the constitutional dis- 
turbance in the offspring, caused by a cross between 
, two distinct species or races, often leads to the re- 
appearance of long-lost characters ; so here, the 
disturbance in the constitution of the individual, result- 
ing from castration, produces the same effect. 

The tusks of the elephant, in the different species or 
races, differ according to sex, nearly as do the horns of 
ruminants. In India and Malacca the males alone are 
provided with well-developed tusks. The elephant of 
Ceylon is considered by most naturalists as a distinct 
race, but by some as a distinct species, and here ‘‘ not 
“ one in a hundred is found with tusks, the few that 
“ possess them being exclusively males.” The 
African elephant is undoubtedly distinct, and the 
female has large well-developed tusks, though not so 
large as those of the male. 

These differences in the tusks of the several races 
and species of elephants — the great variability of the 
horns of deer, as notably in the wild reindeer — the 
occasional presence of horns in the female Antilope 
Bezoartica, and their frequent absence in the female of 
Antilocapra americana — the presence of two tusks in 
some few male narwhals — the complete absence of 
tusks in 'some female walruses — are all instances 
of the extreme variability of secondary sexual cha- 

I have given vaiious ex- ii., 1868, pp. 39-47. 
periments and other evidence Sir J. Emerson Tennent, 

proving that this is the case, in ‘ Ceylon,’ 1859, vol. ii. p. 274. 
my ‘ Variation of Animals and For Malacca, ‘ Journal of Indian 
Plantsunder Domestication,’ vol. Archipelago,’ vol. iv. p. 357. 


CHAt>. XVII. MAMMALS — LAW OF BATTLE. 775 

racters, and of their liability to differ in closely allied 
forms. 

Although tusks and horns appear in all cases to have 
been primarily developed as sexual weapons, they often 
serve other purposes. The elephant uses his tusks in 
attacking the tiger ; according to Bruce, he scores the 
trunks of trees until they can be thrown down easily, 
and he likewise thus extracts the farinaceous cores of 
palms ; in Africa he often uses one tusk, always the 
same, to probe the ground and thus ascertain whether 
it will bear his weight. The common bull defends the 
herd with his horns ; an'd the elk in Sweden has been 
known, according to Lloyd, to strike a wolf dead with 
a single blow of his great horns. Many similar facts 
could be given. One of the most curious secondary 
uses to which the horns of an animal m.ay be occasion- 
ally put, is that observed by Captain Hatton with the 
wild goat {Capra segagrus) of the Himalayas and, as it 
is also said with the ibex, namely that when the male 
accidentally falls from a height he bends inwards his 
head, and by alighting on his massive horns, breaks the 
shock. The female cannot thus use her horns, which 
are smaller, but from her more quiet disposition she 
does not need this strange kind of shield so much. 

Each male animal uses his weapons in his own 
peculiar fashion. The common ram makes a charge 
and butts with such force with the bases of his horns, 
that I have seen a powerful man knocked over like a 
child. Goats and certain species of sheep, for instance 
the Ovis cijcloceros of Afghanistan,^^ rear on their hind 

‘ Calcutta Journal of Nat. the authority of Capt. Hutton 

Hist.’ vol. ii. 1843, p. 526. and others. For the wild Pem- 

“ Mr. Blyth, in ‘ Land and brokeshire goats, see the ‘ Field/ 
Water/ March, 1867, p. 134, on 1869, p. 150. 


776 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


legs, and then not only butt, but “ make a cut down 
“ and a jerk up, with the ribbed front of their scimitar- 
“ shaped horn, as with a sabre. When the 0, cyclocerus 
“ attacked a large domestic ram, who was a noted 
** bruiser, he conquered him by the sheer novelty of his 
“ mode of fighting, always closing at once with his 
“ adversary, and catching him across the face and nose 
“ wish a sharp drawing jerk of the head, and then 
“ bounding out of the way before the blow could be 
“ returned.” In Pembrokeshire a male goat, the 
master of a flock which during several generations had 
run wild, was known to have‘ killed several males in 
single combat; this goat possessed enormous horns, 
measuring thirty nine inches in a straight line from 
tip to tip. The common bull, as every one knows, 
gores and tosses his opponent ; but the Italian buffalo 
is said never to use his horns, he gives a tremendous 
blow with his convex forehead, and then tramples on 
his fallen enemy with his knees — an instinct which the 
common bull does not possess.^^ Hence a dog who pins 
a buffalo by the nose is immediately crushed. We 
must, however, remember that the Italian buffalo has 
been long domesticated, and it is by no means certain 
that the wild parent-form had similar horns. Mr. 
Bartlett informs me that when a female Cape buffalo 
{Bubalus caffer) was turned into an enclosure with a 
bull of the same species, she attacked him, and he in 
return pushed her about with great violence. But it 
was manifest to Mr. Bartlett that, had not the bull 
shewn dignified forbearance, he could easily have 
killed her by a single lateral thrust with his immense 

23 M. E. M. Bailly, ‘Sar des Sc. Nat.’ tom. ii. 1824, p. 
I’usage des Corne.s,* &c., ‘Anna! 369. 


Chap. XVII, MAMMALS— LAW OF BATTLE. 777 

horns. The giraffe uses his short, hair-covered horns, 
which are rather longer in the male than in the female, 
in a curious manner ; for, with his long neck, he swings 
his head to either side, almost upside down, with such 
force that I have seen a hard plank deeply indented by 
a single blow. 

With antelopes it is sometimes difficult to imagine 
how they can possibly use their curiously- shaped 
horns ; thus the springboc {Ant. euchore) has rather 
short upright horns, with the sharp points bent 



I'lg. 63. Oryx leucoryx, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie). 


inwards almost at right angles, so as to face each 
other ; Mr. Bartlett does not know how they are used, 
but suggests that they would inflict a fearful wound 
down each side of the face of an antagonist. The 
slightly- curved horns of the Oryx leucoryx (fig. 63) are 
directed backwards, and are of such length that their 
points reach beyond the middle of the back, over 
which they extend in almost parallel lines. Thus 
they seem singularly ill-fitted for fighting; but Mr. 


778 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paiit n. 


Bartlett informs me that when two of these animals 
prepare for battle, they kneel down, with their heads 
between their fore legs, and in this attitude the horns 
stand nearly parallel and close to the ground, with the 
points directed forwards and a little upwards. The 
combatants then gradually approach each other, and 
each endeavours to get the upturned points under the 
body of the other ; if one succeeds in doing this, he 
suddenly springs up, throwing up his head at the 
same time, and can thus wound or perhaps even trans- 
fix his antagonist. Both animals always kneel down, 
so as to guard as far as possible against this manoeuvre. 
It has been recorded that one of these antelopes has 
used his horns with effect even against a lion ; yet 
from being forced to place his head between the fore- 
legs in order to bring the points of the horns forward, 
he would generally be under a great disadvantage 
when attacked by any other animal. It is, therefore, 
not probable that the horns have been modified into 
their present great length and peculiar position, as a 
protection against beasts of prey. We_can however 
see that, as soon as some ancient male progenitor of 
the Oryx acquired moderately long horns, directed a 
little backwards, he would be compelled, in his battles 
with rival males, to bend his head somewhat inwards 
or downwards, as is now done by certain stags; and it 
is not improbable that he might have acquired the habit 
of at first occasionally and afterwards of regularly 
kneeling down. In this case it is almost certain that 
the males which possessed the longest horns would 
have had a great advantage over others with shorter 
horns ; and then the horns would gradually have been 
rendered longer and longer, through sexual selection, 


Chap. XVH. MAMMALS — LAW OF BATTLE. 779 


until they acquired their present extraordinary length 
and position. 

With stags of many kinds the branches of the horns 
offer a curious case of difi&culty ; for certainly a single 
straight point would inflict a much more serious 
wound than several ’ diverging ones. In Sir Philip 
Egerton’s museum there is a horn of the red-deer 
{Gervus elaphus)y thirty inches in length, with “not 
“ fewer than fifteen snags or branches ; ” and at Moritz- 
burg there is still preserved a pair of antlers of a 
red-deer, shot in 1699 by Frederick I., one of which 
bears the astonishing number of thirty-three branches 
and the other twenty-seven, making altogether sixty 
branches. Eichardson figures a pair of antlers of the 
wild reindeer with twenty-nine points.^^ From the 
manner in which the horns are branched, and more 
especially from deer being known occasionally to fight 
together by kicking with their fore-feet,^^ M. Bailly 
actually comes to the conclusion that their horns are 
more injurious than useful to them ? But this author 
overlooks the pitched battles between rival males. As 
I felt much perplexed about the use or advantage of 
the branches, I applied to Mr. McNeill of Colonsay, 
who has long and carefully observed the habits of red- 
deer, and he informs me that he has never seen some 
of the branches brought into use, but that the brow 


^ On the horns of red-deer, 
Owen, ‘ British Fossil Mammals,’ 
1846, p. 478 ; Eichardson on the 
horns of the reindeer, ‘ Fauna 
Bor. Americana,’ 1829, p. 240. 
I am indebted to Prof. Victor 
Cams, for the Moritzburg case. 

^ Hon. J. D. Caton (‘Ottawa 
Acad, of Nat. Science,’ May, 


1868, p. 9) says that the 
American deer fight with their 
fore-feet, after “ the question of 
“superiority has been once 
“settled and acknowledged in 
“ the herd.” Bailly ‘ Sur I’usage 
des Comes,’ ‘Annales des Sc. 
Nat.’ tom. ii. 1824, p. 371. 


780 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


antlers, from inclining downwards, are a great pro- 
tection to the forehead, and their points are likewise 
used in attack. Sir Philip Egerton also informs me 
both as to red-deer and fallow-deer that, in fighting, 
they suddenly dash together, and getting their horns 
fixed against each other’s bodies, a desperate struggle 
ensues. When one is at last forced to yield and turn 
round, the victor endeavours to plunge his brow 
antlers into his defeated foe. It thus appears that 
the upper branches are used chiefly or exclusively for 
pushing and fencing. Nevertheless in some species 
the upper branches are used as weapons of ofience ; 
when a man was attacked by a wapiti deer {Gervus 
canadensis) in Judge Caton’s park in Ottawa, and 
several men tried to rescue him, the stag “ never 
“ raised his head from the ground ; in fact he kept his 
“ face almost flat on the ground, with his nose nearly 
“between his fore feet, except when he rolled his 
“ head to one side to take a new observation pre- 
“ paratory to a plunge.” In this position the ends of 
the horns were directed against his adversaries. “ In 
“ rolling his head he necessarily raised it somewhat, 
“ because his antlers were so long that he could not 
“ roll his head without raising them on one side, while, 
“ on the other side they touched the ground.” The 
stag by this procedure gradually drove the party of 
rescuers backwards to a distance of 150 or 200 feet ; 
and the attacked man was killed.^® 

Although the horns of stags are efficient weapons, 
there can, I think be no doubt that a single point 
would have been much more dangerous than a 

See a most interesting Hon. J. D. Caton’s paper, as 
account in the Appendix to above quoted. 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — LAW OF BATTLE. 


781 


branched antler ; and Judge Caton, who has had 
large experience with deer, fully concurs in this 
conclusion. Nor do the branching horns, though 
highly important as a means of defence against rival 
stags, appear perfectly well adapted for this purpose, 
as they are liable to become interlocked. The sus- 
picion has therefore crossed my mind that they may 
serve in part as ornaments. That the branched 
antlers of stags as well as the elegant lyrated 
horns of certain antelopes, with their graceful double 
curvature (fig. 64), are ornamental in our eyes, no one 
will dispute. If, then, the horns, like the splendid 
accoutrements of the knights of old, add to the noble 
appearance of stags and antelopes, they may have been 
modified partly for this purpose, though mainly for 
actual service in battle; but I have no evidence in 
favour of this belief. 

An interesting case has lately been published, from 
which it appears that the horns of a deer in one 
district in the United States are now being modified 
through sexual and natural selection. A writer in an 
excellent American Journal says, that he has hunted 
for the last twenty-one years in the Adirondacks, 
where the Cervus virginianus abounds. About four- 
teen years ago he first heard of spike-horn bucks. 
These became from year to year more common ; about 
five years ago he shot one, and' afterwards another, 
and now they are frequently killed. The spike-horn 
“ differs greatly from the common antler of the G. vir- 
“ ginianus. It consists of a single spike, more slender 
“ than the antler, and scarcely half so long, projecting 
“ forward from the brow, and terminating in a very 
^ ‘ The American Naturalist,’ Dec. 1869, p. 552, 



782 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part H. 

sharp point. It gives a considerable advantage to 
‘‘ its possessor over the common buck. Besides en- 
abling him to run more swiftly through the thick 


Fig. 64. Strepsiceros Kudu (from Sir Andrew Smith’s ‘2k)ology of South Africa’). 

woods and underbrush (every hunter knows that 
“ does and yearling bucks run much more rapidly 
than the large bucks when armed with their 


. Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — LAW OF BATTLE. 


783 


“ cumbrous antlers), the spike-horn is a more effective 
“ weapon than the common antler. With this ad- 
“ vantage the spike-horn bucks are gaining upon the 
“ common bucks, and may, in time, entirely supersede 
“ them in the Adirondacks. Undoubtedly, the first 
“ spike-horn buck was merely an accidental freak of 
“ nature. But his spike-horns gave him an advantage, 
“and enabled him to propagate his peculiarity. His 
“descendants having a like advantage, have propa- 
“ gated the peculiarity in a constantly increasing ratio, 
“ till they are slowly crowding the antlered deer from 
“ the region they inhabit.” A critic has well objected 
to this account by asking, why, if the simple horns are 
now so advantageous, were the branched antlers of the 
parent-form ever developed ? To this I can only 
answer by remarking, that a new mode of attack with 
new weapons might be a great advantage, as shewn by 
the case of the Ovis cydoceros, who thus conquered a 
domestic ram famous for his fighting power. Though 
the branched antlers of a stag are well adapted for 
fighting with his rivals, and though it might be an 
advantage to the prong-horned variety slowly to 
acquire long and branched horns, if he had to fight 
only with others of the same kind, yet it by no means 
follows that branched horns would be the best fitted 
for conquering a foe differently armed. In the fore- 
going case of the Oryx leucoryx, it is almost certain 
that the victory would rest with an antelope having 
short horns, and who therefore did not need to kneel 
down, though an oryx might profit by having still 
longer horns, if he fought only with his proper rivals. 

Male quadrupeds, which are furnished with tusks, 
use them in various ways, as in the case of horns. The 


784 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


boar strikes 'laterally and upwards ; the musk-deer 
downwards with serious effect.^® The walrus, though 
having so short a neck and so unwieldy a body, “ can 
“ strike either upwards, or downwards, or sideways, 
“ with equal dexterity.” I was informed by the late 
Dr. Falconer, that the Indian elephant fights in a 
different manner according to the position and curva- 
ture of his tusks. When they are directed forwards 
and upwards he is able to fling a tiger to a great 
distance — it is said to even thirty feet ; when they are 
short and turned downwards he endeavours suddenly 
to pin the tiger to the ground and, in consequence, is 
dangerous to the rider, who is liable to be jerked off 
the howdah.^® 

Very few male quadrupeds possess weapons of two 
distinct kinds specially adapted for fighting with rival 
males. The male muntjac-deer (Cervulus), however, 
offers an exception, as he is provided with horns and 
exserted canine teeth. But we may infer from what 
follows that one form of weapon has often been 
replaced in the course of ages by another. With 
ruminants the development of horns generally stands 
in an inverse relation with that of even moderately 
developed canine teeth. Thus camels, guanacoes, 
chevrotains, and musk-deer, are hornless, and they 
have efiicient canines ; these teeth being “ always of 

smaller size in the females than in the males.” The 
Camelidm have, in addition to their true canines, a pair 
of canine-shaped incisors in their upper jaws.^^ Male 

“ Pallas, * Spicilegia Zoo- manner in which the short- 
logica,’ fasc. xiii. 1779, p. 18. tusked Mooknah variety attacks 

^ Ijamont, ‘ Seasons with the other elephants. 

Sea-Horses,’ 1861, p. 141. Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Verte- 

See also Corse (‘ Philosoph. brates,’ vol. iii. p. 349, 

Transact.’ 1799, p. 212) on the 


. Chap. XVn. MAMMALS — LAW OP BATTLE. 


785 


deer and antelopes, on the other hand, j)ossess horns, 
and they rarely have canine teeth; and these, when 
present, are always of small size, so that it is doubt- 
ful whether they are of any service in their battles. 
In Antilope montana they exist only as rudiments in the 
young male, disappearing as he grows old ; and they 
are absent in the female at all ages ; but the females 
of certain other antelopes and of certain deer have 
been known occasionally to exhibit rudiments of these 
teeth.®^ Stallions have small canine teeth, which are 
either quite absent or rudimentary in the mare ; hut 
they do not appear to he used in fighting, for stallions 
bite with their incisors, and do not open their mouths 
wide like camels and guanacoes. Whenever the adult 
male possesses canines, now inefficient, whilst the 
female has either none or mere rudiments, we may 
conclude that the early male progenitor of the species 
was provided with efficient canines, which have been 
partially transferred to the females. The reduction of 
these teeth in the males seems to have followed from 
some change in their manner of fighting, often (but 
not in the horse) caused by the development of new 
weapons. 

Tusks and horns are manifestly of high importance 
to their possessors, for their development consumes 
much organised matter. A single tusk of the Asiatic 
elephant — one of the extinct woolly species — and of 

See Riippell (in ‘ IVoc. in an adult female deer. In old 

Zoolog. Sue.’ Jan. 12, 1836, males of the musk-deer the 

p. 3) on the canines in deer and canines (Pallas, ‘Sjne. Zoolo*?.* 

antelopes, with a note by Mr. fasc. xiii. 1779, p. 18) sometimes 

Martin on a female American grow to the length of three 

deer. See also Falconer inches, whilst in old females a 

(‘ Palaeont. Memoirs and Notes,’ rudiment projects scarcely half 

vol. i. 1868, p. 576) on canines an inch above the gums. 

3 E 


786 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


the African ^elephant, have been known to weigh 
respectively 150, 160, and 180 pounds; and even 
greater weights have been given by some authors.^^ 
With deer, in which the horns are periodically renewed, 
the drain on the constitution must be greater ; the 
horns, for instance, of the moose weigh from fifty to 
sixty pounds, and those of the extinct Irish elk from 
sixty to seventy pounds — the skull of the latter 
weighing on an average only five pounds and a quarter. 
Although the horns are not periodically renewed in 
sheep, yet their development, in the opinion of many 
agriculturists, entails a sensible loss to the breeder. 
Stags, moreover, in escaping from beasts of prey are 
loaded with an additional weight for the race, and are 
greatly retarded in passing through a woody country. 
The moose, for instance, with horns extending five and 
a half feet from tip to tip, although so skilful in their 
use that he will not touch or break a twig when walk- 
ing quietly, cannot act so dexterously whilst rushing 
away from a pack of wolves. “ During his progress he 
“ holds his nose up, so as to lay the horns horizontally 
“ back ; and in this attitude cannot see the ground 
distinctly.” The tips of the horns of the great Irish 
elk were actually eight feet apart'! Whilst the horns 
are covered with velvet, which lasts with red-deer for 
about twelve weeks, they are extremely sensitive to a 
blow ; so that in Germany the stags at this time 
somewhat change their habits, and avoiding dense 

^ Emerson Tennent, * Ceylon, j[)almata^ pp. 236, 237 ; on the 
1859, vol. ii. p. 275; Owen, expanse of the horns, ‘Land and 
‘ British Fossil Mammals,’ 1846, Water,’ 1869, p. 143. See also 
p. 245. Owen, ‘ British Fossil Mammals,’ 

^ Bichardson, ‘Fauna Bor. on the Irish elk, pp. 447, 455. 
Americana,’ on the moose, Alces 


. CuAP XVII. MAMMALS — GREATER SIZE OF MALE. 787 

forests, frequent young woods and low thickets.^* 
These facts remind us that male birds have acquired 
ornamental plumes at the cost of retarded flight, and 
other ornaments at the cost of some loss of power in 
their battles with rival males. 

With mammals, when, as is often the case, the sexes 
difier in size, the males are almost always larger and 
stronger. I am informed by Mr. Gould that this holds 
good in a marked manner with the marsupials of 
Australia,^ the males of which appear to continue grow- 
ing until ah unusually late age. But the most extra- 
ordinary case is that of one of the seals (Callorhinus 
ursinus), a full-grown female weighing less than one- 
sixth of a full-grown male.^® Dr. Gill remarks that it 
is with the polygamous seals, the males of which are 
well known to fight savagely together, that the sexes 
differ much in size ; the monogamous species differing 
but little. Whales also afford evidence of the relation 
existing between the pugnacity of the males and their 
large size compared with that of the female ; the males 
of the right-whales do not fight together, and they 
are not larger, but rather smaller, than their females ; 
on the other hand, male sperm-whales fight much 
together, and their bodies are “ often found scarred 
“ with the imprint of their rival’s teeth,” and they are 
double the size of the females. The greater strength 
of the male, as Hunter long ago remarked,®^ is invari- 

“ ‘ Forest Creatures,’ by C. observer, Capt. Bryant. Dr. 
Boner, 1861, p. 60. GiJl in ‘ The American Natural- 

^ See the very interesting ist,’ Jan. 1871, Prof. Shaler 
paper by Mr. J. A. Allen in on the relative size of the sexes of 
‘ Bull. Mus. Comp. Zoolog. of whales, ‘ American Naturalist,’ 
Cambridge, United States,’ vol. Jan. 1873. 
ii. No 1. p. 82. The weights ‘ Animal Economy,’ p. 45. 

were ascertained by a careful 


788 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part 1L 


ably displayed in those parts of the body which are 
brought into action in fighting with rival males — for 
instance, in the massive neck of the bull. Male 
quadrupeds are also more courageous and pugnacious 
than the females. There can be little doubt that 
^these characters have been gained, partly through 
sexual selection, owing to a long series of victories, 
by the stronger and more courageous males over the 
weaker, and partly through the inherited effects of use. 
It is probable that the successive variations in strength, 
size, and courage, whether due to mere variability or 
to the effects of use, by the accumulation of which 
male quadrupeds have acquired these characteristic 
qualities, occurred rather late in life, and were con- 
sequently to a large extent limited in their trans- 
mission to the same sex. 

From these considerations I was anxious to obtain 
information as to the Scotch deer-hound, the sexes of 
which differ more in size than those of any other breed 
(though bloodhounds difi'er considerably), or than in 
any wild canine species known to me. Accordingly, I 
applied to Mr. Guppies, well known for his success with 
this breed, who has weighed and measured many of his 
own dogs, and who has with great kindness collected 
for me the following facts from various sources. Fine 
male dogs, measured at the shoulder, range from 28 
inches, which is low, to 33 or even 34 inches in height ; 
and in weight from 80 pounds, which is light, to 120 
pounds, or even more. The females range in height from 
23 to 27, or even to 28 inches ; and in weight from 50 to 
70, or even 80 pounds.^® Mr. Guppies concludes that from 

See also Kichardson’s Much valuable information on 
‘Manual on the Dog,’ p. 59. the Scottish deer-hound is 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — GREATER SIZE OF MALES. 789 

95 to 100 pounds for the male, and 70 for the female, 
would be a safe average ; but there is reason to believe 
that formerly both sexes attained a greater weight. Mr. 
Cupples has weighed puppies when a fortnight old ; in 
one litter the average weight of four males exceeded that 
of two females by six and a half ounces ; in another 
litter the average weight of four males exceeded that of 
one female by less than one ounce ; the same males when 
three weeks old, exceeded the female by seven and a half 
ounces, and at the age of six weeks by nearly fourteen 
ounces. Mr. Wright of Yeldersley House, in a letter 
to Mr. Cupples, says : ‘‘ I have taken notes on the sizes 
“ and weights of puppies of many litters, and as far as 
‘‘ my experience goes, dog-puppies as a rule differ very 
“ little from bitches till they arrive at about five or six 
“ months old ; and then the dogs begin to increase, 

“ gaining upon the bitches both in weight and size. 

“ At birth, and for several weeks afterwards, a bitch- 
“ puppy will occasionally be larger than any of the 
“dogs, but they are invariably beaten by them later.” 
Mr. McNeill, of Colonsay, concludes that ‘‘ the males 
“ do not attain their full growth till over two years 
“ old, though the females attain it sooner.” According 
to- Mr. Cupples’ experience, male dogs go on growing in 
stature till they are from twelve to eighteen months old, 
and in weight till from eighteen to twenty-four months 
old; whilst the females cease increasing in stature 
at the age of from nine to fourteen or fifteen months, * 
and in weight at the age of from twelve to fifteen 


given by Mr. McNeill, who first 1 hope that Mr. Cupples will 

called attention to the inequality keep to his intention of publish- 

in size between the sexes, in ing a full account and history of 
Scro})e’s ‘ Art of Deer Stalking.’ this famous breed. 


790 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


months. From these various statements it is clear 
that the full difference in size between the male and 
female Scotch deer-hound is not acquired until rather 
late in life. The males almost exclusively are used for 
coursing, for, as Mr. McNeill informs me, the females 
Jiave not sufficient strength and weight to pull down a 
full-grown deer. From the names used in old legends, 
it appears, as I hear from Mr. C apples, that, at a very 
ancient period, the males were the most celebrated, the 
females being mentioned only as the mothers of famous 
dogs. Hence, during many generations, it is the male 
which has been chiefly tested for strength, size, speed, 
and courage, and the best will have been bred from. 
As, however, the males do not attain their full dimen- 
sions until rather late in life, they will have tended, in 
accordance with the law often indicated, to transmit 
their characters to their male offspring alone ; and thus 
the great inequality in size between the sexes of the 
Scotch deer-hound may probably be accounted for. 

The males of some few quadrupeds possess organs or 
parts developed solely as a means of defence against 
the attacks of other males. Some kinds of deer use, as 
we have seen, the upper branches of their horns chiefly 
or exclusively for defending themselves ; and the Oryx 
antelope, as I am informed by Mr. Bartlett, fences 
most skilfully with his long, gently curved horns ; but 
these are likewise used as organs of offence. The 
" same observer remarks that rhinoceroses in fighting, 
parry each other’s sidelong blows with their horns, 
which clatter loudly together, as do the tusks of boars. 
Although wild boars fight desperately, they seldom, 
according to Brehm, receive fatal wounds, as the blows 
fall on each other’s tusks, or on the layer of gristly 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — MEANS OF DEFENCE. 791 


skin covering the shoulder, called by the German 
hunters, the shield ; and here we have a part specially 
modified for defence. With hoars in the prime of life 
(see fig. 65) the tusks in the lower jaw are used for 
fighting, hut they become in old age, as Brehm states, 
so much curved inwards and upwards over the snout 
that they can no longer be used in this way. They 
may, however, still serve, and even more effectively, as a 
means of defence. In compensation for the loss of the 
lower tusks as weapons of offence, those in the upper 
jaw, which always pro- 
ject a little laterally, 
increase in old age so 
much in length and 
curve so much upwards 
that they can he used 
for Attack. Neverthe- 
less, an old boar is not 
so dangerous to man as 
one at the age of six or 
seven years.^® Fig. es 

In the full-grown 
male Babirusa pig of Celebes (fig. 66), the lower tusks 
are formidable weapons, like those of the European boar 
in the prime of life, whilst the upper tusks are so long 
and have their points so much curled inwards, sometimes 
even touching the forehead, that they are utterly useless 
as weapons of attack. They more nearly resemble horns 
than teeth, and are so manifestly useless as teeth that 
the animal was formerly supposed to rest his head by 
hooking them on to a branch ! Their convex surfaces, 
however, if the head were held a little laterally, would 
^ Brehm^ ‘ Tiiierleben,’ B. ii. ss. 729-732. 



Head of Common wild boar, in prime 
of life (from Brehm). 



Fig. CO. Skull of tlie Tiabirusa I'ig (from WaDace’a ‘ ilaUy Archipelago’). 

whilst in the European hoar the lower tusks assume in 
a less degree and only during old age nearly the same 
form, and then serve in like manner solely for 
defence. 

^ Sei 3 Mr. Wallace’s interest- Malay Archi[)elago/ 18G9, vpl. k 
ing account of tins animal, ‘ The p. 435, 


792 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part IT. 


serve as an excellent guard ; and hence, perhaps, it is 
that in old animals they “ are generally broken off, as 
“ if by fighting.”^® Here, then, we have the curious 
case of the upper tusks of the Babirusa regularly 
assuming during the prime of life a structure which 
apparently renders them fitted only for defence ; 


■ Chap. XVII. MAMMALS--MEANS OF DEFENCE. 793 


In the wart-hog {Phacochoerus sethiopicus, fig. 67) 
the tusks in the upper jaw of the male curve upwards 
during the prime of life, and from being pointed serve 
as formidable weapons. The tusks in the lower jaw 
are sharper than those in the upper, but from their 
shortness it seems hardly possible that they can be 
used as weapons of attack. They must, however, 
greatly strengthen those in the upper jaw, from being 



Fig. 67. Head of female ^Ethiopian wart-hog, from ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1869, shewing 
the Faroe characters the male, though on a reduced scale. 

N.D. When the engraving was first made, 1 was under the impression that it renre- 
seated the male. 


ground so as to fit closely against their bases. Neither 
the upper nor the lower tusks appear to have been 
specially modified to act as guards, though no doubt 
they are to a certain extent used for this purpose. 
Hut the wart-hog is not destitute of other special 
means of protection, for it has, on each side of the face, 
beneath the eyes, a rather stiff, yet flexible, cartilagin- 
ous, oblong pad (fig. 67), which projects two or three 


794 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


indies outwards ; and it appeared to Mr. Bartlett and 
myself, when viewing the living animal, that these 
pads, when struck from beneath by the tusks of an 
opponent, would be turned upw^ards, and would thus 
admirably protect the somewhat prominent eyes. I 
may add, on the authority of Mr. Bartlett, that these 
boars when fighting stand directly face to face. 

Lastly, the African river-hog {Potomochoerus 'penicil- 
latus) has a hard cartilaginous knob on each side of the 
face beneath the eyes, which answers to the flexible 
pad of the wart-hog ; it has also two bony prominences 
on the upper jaw above the nostrils. A boar of this 
species in the Zoological Gardens recently broke into 
the cage of the wart-hog. They fought all night long, 
and were found in the morning much exhausted, but 
not seriously wounded. It is a significant fact, as 
shewing the purposes of the above-described projections 
and excrescences, that these were covered with blood, 
and were scored and abraded in an extraordinary 
manner. 

Although the males of so many members of the pig 
family are provided with weapons, and as we have just 
seen with means of defence, these weapons seem to 
have been acquired within a rather late geological 
period. Dr. Forsyth Major specifies^' several miocene 
species, in none of which do the tusks appear to 
have been largely developed in the males ; and Prof. 
Biitimeyer was formerly struck with this same fact. 

The mane of the lion forms a good defence against 
the attacks of rival lions, the one danger to which he is 
liable ; for the males, as Sir A. Smith informs me, 
engage in terrible battles, and a young lion dares not 
‘ Atti della Soc. Italiana di Sc. Nat.’ 1873, vol. xv. fasc. iv. 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — MEANS OF DEFENCE. 795 


approach an old one. In 1857 a tiger at Bromwich 
broke into the cage of a lion and a fearful scene ensued : 
“ the lion’s mane saved his neck and head from being 
‘‘much injured, but the tiger at last succeeded in 
“ ripping up his belly, and in a few minutes he was 
“ dead.” The broad ruff round the throat and chin 
of the Canadian lynx [Felis canadensis) is much longer 
in the male than in the female ; hut whether it serves 
as a defence I do not know. Male seals are well 
known to fight desperately together, and the males of 
certain kinds {Otaria jubata)^^ have great manes, 
whilst the females have small ones or none. The 
male baboon of the Cape of Good Hope {Gynocephalus 
porcarius) has a much longer mane and larger canine 
teeth than the female ; and the mane probably serves 
as a protection, for, on asking the keepers in the 
Zoological Gardens, without giving them any clue to 
my object, whether any of the monkeys especially 
attacked each other by the nape of the neck, I was 
answered that this was not the case, except with the 
above baboon. In the Hamadryas baboon, Ehrenberg 
compares the mane of the adult male to that of a 
young lion, whilst in the young of both sexes and in 
the female the mane is almost absent. 

It appeared to me probable that the immense woolly 
mane of the male American bison, which reaches 
almost to the ground, and is much more developed in 
the males than in the females, served as a protection 

‘The Times,’ Nov. 10th, 109. Mr. J. A. Allen, in the 

1857. In regard to the Canada paper above quoted (p. 75), 
lynx, see Audubon and Bach- doubts whether the hair, which 
man, ‘Quadrupeds of North is longer on the neck in the 
America,’ 1846, p. 139. male than in the female, de- 

Dr. Murie, on Otaria, serves to be called a mane. 

‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1869, p. 


796 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paiit TI. 


to them in their terrible battles ; but an experienced 
hunter told Judge Caton that he had never observed 
anything which favoured this belief. The stallion has 
a thicker and fuller mane than the mare ; and I have 
made particular inquiries of two great trainers and 
breeders, who have had charge of many entire horses, 
and am assured that they invariably endeavour to 
‘‘ seize one another by the neck.” It does not, how- 
ever, follow from the foregoing statements, that when 
the hair on the neck serves as a defence, that it was 
originally developed for this purpose, though this is 
probable in some cases, as in that of the lion. I am 
informed by Mr. McNeill that the long hairs on the 
throat of the stag (Cervus elapJius) serve as a great 
protection to him when hunted, for the dogs generally 
endeavour to seize him by the throat ; but it is not 
probable that these hairs were specially developed for 
this purpose ; otherwise the young and the females 
would have been equally protected. 

Choice in Fairing hy either Sex of Quadrupeds , — 
Before describing in the next chapter, the difierences 
between the sexes in voice, odours emitted, and orna- 
ments, it will be convenient here to consider whether 
the sexes exert any choice in their unions. Does the 
female prefer any particular male, either before or 
after the males may have fought together for supremacy; 
or does the male, when not a polygamist, select any 
particular female? The general impression amongst 
breeders seems to be that the male accepts any female ; 
and this owing to his eagerness, is, in most cases, 
probably the truth. Whether the female as a general 
rule indifferently accepts any male is much more 


Chap. XYII. MAMMALS — CHOICE IN FAIRING. 


797 


doubtful. In the fourteenth chapter, on Birds, a 
considerable body of direct and indirect evidence was 
advanced, shewing that the female selects her partner ; 
and it would be a strange anomaly if female quadru- 
peds, which stand higher in the scale and have higher 
mental powers, did not generally, or at least often, 
exert some choice. The female could in most cases 
escape, if wooed by a male that did not please or 
excite her ; and when pursued by several males, as 
commonly occurs, she would often have the opportu- 
nity, whilst they were fighting together, of escaping 
with some one male, or at least of temporarily pairing 
with him. This latter contingency has often been 
observed in Scotland with female red-deer, as I am 
informed by Sir Philip Egerton and others.^^ 

It is scarcely possible that much should be known 
about female quadrupeds in a state of nature making 
any choice in their marriage unions. The following 
curious details on the courtship of one of the eared 
seals {Gallorhinus ursinus) are given on the authority 
of Capt. Bryant, who had ample opportunities for 
observation. He says, “ Many of the females on their 
“ arrival at the island where they breed appear desirous 
“ of returning to some particular male, and frequently 
climb the outlying rocks to overlook the rookeries, 
calling out and listening as if for a familiar voice. 
“ Then changing to another place they do the same 


^ Mr. Boner, in his excellent 
description of the habits of the 
red-deer in Germany (‘ Forest 
Creatures,* 1861, p. 81) says, 
while the stag is defending his 
“rights against one intruder, 
“ another invades the sanctuary 
“ of his harem, and carries off 


“ trophy after trophy.” Ex- 
actly the same thing occurs 
with seals, see Mr. J. A. Allen, 
ibid. p. 100. 

« Mr. J. A. Allen in ‘Bull. 
Mus. Corap. Zoolog. of Cam- 
bridge, United States,’ vol. ii. 
No. 1, p. 99. 


798 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part IL 


“again .... As soon as a female readies the shore, 
‘‘ the nearest male goes down to meet her, making 
“ meanwhile a noise like the ducking of a hen to her 
‘‘ chickens. He bows to her and coaxes her until he 
gets between her and the water so that she cannot 
“ escape him. Then his manner changes, and with a 
“ harsh growl he drives her to a place in his harem. 
“ This continues until the lower row of harems is 
“ nearly full. Then the males higher up select the 
“ time when their more fortunate neighbours are off 
“ their guard to steal their wives. This they do by 
“ taking them in their mouths and lifting them over 
“ the heads of the other females, and carefully placing 
“ them in their own harem, carrying them as cats do 
“ their kittens. Those still higher up pursue the same 
“ method until the whole space is occupied. Frequently 
“ a struggle ensues between two males for the posses- 
“ sion ot the same female, and both seizing her at once 
“ pull her in two or terribly lacerate her with their 
“ teeth. When the space is all filled, the old male 
“ walks around complacently reviewing his family, 
“ scolding those who crowd or disturb the others, and 
“ fiercely driving off all intruders. This surveillance 
“ always keeps him actively occupied.” 

As so little is known about the courtship of animals 
in a state of nature, I have endeavoured to discover 
how far our domesticated quadrupeds evince any 
choice in their unions. Dogs offer the best oppor- 
tunity for observation, as they are carefully attended 
to and well understood. Many breeders have expressed 
a strong opinion on this head. Thus, Mr. Maybe w 
remarks, “ The females are able to bestow their 
“affections; and tender recollections are as potent 


Chap. XVII. MAMMALS — CHOICE IN PAIRING. 


799 


“ over them as they are known to be in other cases, 
“ where higher animals are concerned. Bitches are 
“ not always prudent in their loves, but are apt to 
“ fling themselves away on curs of low degree. If 
“ reared with a companion of vulgar appearance, there 
“ often springs up between the pair a devotion which 
“ no time can afterwards subdue. The passion, for 
“ such it really is, becomes of a more than romantic 

endurance.” Mr. Mayhew, who attended chiefly to 
the smaller breeds, is convinced that the females are 
strongly attracted by males of a large size.'*® The 
well-known veterinary Blaine states that his own 
female pug became so attached to a spaniel, and a 
female setter to a cur, that in neither case would they 
pair with a dog of their own breed until several weeks 
had elapsed. Two similar and trustworthy accounts 
have been given me in regard to a female retriever 
and a spaniel, both of which became enamoured with 
terrier-dogs. 

Mr. Guppies informs me that he can personally 
vouch for the accuracy of the following more remark- 
able case, in which a valuable and wonderfully- 
intelligent female terrier loved a retriever belonging 
to a neighbour to such a degree, that she had often 
to be dragged away from him. After their permanent 
separation, although repeatedly shewing milk in her 
teats, she would never acknowledge the courtship of 
any other dog, and to the regret of her owner never 
bore puppies. Mr. Guppies also states, that in 1868, 
a female deerhound in his kennel thrice produced 

‘ Dogs : their Mauageiiieut,’ Quoted by Alex. Walker 

by E. Mayhew, M.R.C.V.S., 2nd ‘On Intermarriage/ 1838, p. 
edit. 1864, pp. 187-192. 27G ; see also p. 244. 


800 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


puppies, and on each occasion shewed a marked 
preference for one of the largest and handsomest,- but 
not the most eager, of four deerhounds living with her, 
all in the prime of life. Mr. Cupples has observed 
that the female generally favours a dog whom she has 
associated with and knows ; her shyness and timidity 
at first incline her against a strange dog. The male, 
on the contrary, seems rather inclined towards strange 
females. It appears to be rare when the male refuses 
any particular female, but Mr. Wright, of Yeldersley 
House, a great breeder of dogs, informs me that he 
has known some instances ; he cites the case of one of 
his own deerhounds, who would not take any notice of 
a particular female mastiff, so that another deerhound 
had to be employed. It would be superfluous to give, 
as I could, other instances, and I will only add that 
Mr. Barr, who has carefully bred many bloodhounds, 
states that in almost every instance particular indi- 
viduals of opposite sexes shew a decided preference 
for each other. Finally, Mr. Cupples, after attending 
to this subject for another year, has written to me, ‘‘I 
“ have had full confirmation of my former statement, 
“ that dogs in breeding form decided preferences for 
each other, being often influenced by size, bright 
“ colour, and individual characters, as well as by the 
“ degree of their previous familiarity.” 

In regard to horses, Mr. Blenkiron, the greatest 
breeder of race-horses in the world, informs me that 
stallions are so frequently capricious in their choice, 
rejecting one mare and without any apparent cause 
taking to another, that various artifices have to be 
habitually used. The famous Monarque, for instance, 
would never consciously look at tlie dam of Griadiateur, 


Chap. XVU. MAMMALS— CHOICE IN PAIEING. 801 

and a trick had to be practised. We can partly see 
the reason why valuable race-horse stallions, which are 
in such demand as to be exhausted, should be so 
particular in their choice. Mr. Blenkiron has never 
known a mare reject a horse ; but this has occurred in 
Mr. Wright’s stable, so that the mare had to be 
cheated. Prosper Lucas quotes various statements 
from French authorities, and remarks, “ On voit des 
“ etalons qui s’eprennent d’une jument, et negligent 

toutes les autres.” He gives, on the authority of 
Baelen, similar facts in regard to bulls ; and Mr. H. 
Keeks assures me that a famous short-horn bull 
belonging to his father “invariably refused to be 
“ matched with a black cow.” Hoffberg, in describing 
the domesticated reindeer of Lapland says, “ Fceminae 
“ majores et fortiores mares prae caeteris admittunt, ad 
“eos confugiunt, a junioribus agitatae, qui hos in 
“fugam conjiciunt.” A clergyman, who has bred 
many pigs, asserts that sows often reject one boar and 
immediately accept another. 

From these facts there can be no doubt that, with 
most of our domesticated quadrupeds, strong individual 
antipathies and preferences are frequently exhibited, 
and much more commonly by the female than by the 
male. This being the case, it is improbable that the 
unions of quadrupeds in a state of nature should be 
left to mere chance. It is much more probable that 
the females are allured or excited by particular males, 
who possess certain characters in a higher degree than 
other males; but what these characters are, we can 
seldom or never discover with certainty. 

^ ‘ Traite de I’H^red. Nat.’ ‘ Amoenitates Acad.’ vol. iv. 

tom. ii. 1850, p. 296. 1788, p. 160. 


802 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past II. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals — 
continued. 

Voice — Eemarkable sexual peculiarities in seals — Odour — Develop- 
ment of the hair — Colour of the hair and skin — Anomalous 
case of the female being more ornamented than the male — 
Colour and ornaments due to sexual selection — Colour acquired 
for the sake of protection — Colour, though common to both 
sexes, often due to sexual selection — On the disappearance of 
spots and stripes in adult quadrupeds — On the colours and 
ornaments of the Quadrumana — Summary. 

Quadrupeds use their voices for various purposes, as a 
signal of danger, as a call from one member of a troop 
to another, or from the mother to her lost offspring, 
or from the latter for protection to their mother; 
but such uses need not here be considered. We are 
concerned only with the difference between the voices 
of the sexes, for instance between that of the lion and 
lioness, or of the bull and cow. Almost all male 
animals use their voices much more during the 
rutting-season than at any other time; and some, as 
the giraffe and porcupine,^ are said to be completely 
mute excepting at this season. As the throats (i.e. the 
larynx and thyroid bodies of stags periodically 
become enlarged at the beginning of the breeding- 
season, it might be thought that their powerful voices 

^ Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Vcrte- ^Ibid. p. 595. 

brates,’ vol. iii. p. 585. 


Chap. XVIH. MAMMALS — VOCAL ORGANS. 803 

must be somehow of high importance to them; but 
this is very doubtful. From information given to me 
by two experienced observers, Mr. McNeill and Sir P. 
Egerton, it seems that young stags under three years 
old do not roar or bellow ; and that the old ones begin 
bellowing at the commencement of the breeding-season, 
at first only occasionally and moderately, whilst they 
restlessly wander about in search of the females. 
Their battles are prefaced by loud and prolonged 
bellowing, but during the actual conflict they are 
silent. Animals of all kinds which habitually use 
their voices utter various noises under any strong 
emotion, as when enraged and preparing to fight ; but 
this may merely be the result of nervous excitement, 
which leads to the spasmodic contraction of almost all 
the muscles of the body, as when a man grinds his 
teeth and clenches his fists in rage or agony. No 
doubt stags challenge each other to mortal combat by 
bellowing ; but those with the more powerful voices, 
unless at the same time the stronger, better-armed, 
and more courageous, would not gain any advantage 
over their rivals. 

It is possible that the roaring of the lion may be 
of some service to him by striking terror into his 
adversary; for when enraged he likewise erects his 
mane and thus instinctively tries to make himself 
appear as terrible as possible. But it can hardly be 
supposed that the bellowing of the stag, even if it be 
of service to him in this way, can have been important 
enough to have led to the periodical enlargement of 
the throat. Some writers suggest that the bellowing 
serves as a call to the female ; but the experienced 
observers above quoted inform me that female deer do 


804 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part n. 


not search for the male, though the males search 
eagerly for the females, as indeed might be expected 
from what we know of the habits of other male 
quadrupeds. The voice of the female, on the other 
hand, quickly brings to her one or more stags,^ as is 
well known to the hunters who in wild countries 
imitate her cry. If we could believe that the male 
had the power to excite or allure the female by his 
voice, the periodical enlargement of his vocal organs 
would be intelligible on the principle of sexual selec- 
tion, together with inheritance limited to the same 
sex and season ; hut we have no evidence in favour of 
this view. As the case stands, the loud voice of the 
stag during the breeding-season does not seem to be of 
any special service to him, either during his courtship 
or battles, or in any other way. But may we not 
believe that the frequent use of the voice, under the 
strong excitement of love, jealousy, and rage, continued 
during many generations, may at last have produced 
an inherited effect on the vocal organs of the stag, as 
well as of other male animals? This appears to me, 
in our present state of knowledge, the most probable 
view. 

The voice of the adult male gorilla is tremendous, 
and he is furnished with a laryngeal sack, as is the 
adult male orang.^ The gibbons rank among the 
noisiest of monkeys, and the Sumatra species {Hylo~ 
hates syndactijlus) is also furnished with an air sack; 
but Mr. Blyth, who has had opportunities for observa- 
tion, does not believe that the male is noisier than the 

® See, for instance, Major W. reindeer. 

Koss King (‘ The Sportsman in * Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Verte- 
Canada,’ 1866, pp. 53, 131) on brates,’ vol. in. p. 600. 
the habits of the moose and wild 


Ohap. XVm. MAMMALS — VOCAL ORGANS. 


805 


female. Hence, these latter monkeys probably use 
their voices as a mutual call ; and this is certainly the 
case with some quadrupeds, for instance the beaver.® 
Another gibbon, the H. agilis, is remarkable, from 
having the power of giving a complete and correct 
octave of musical notes,® which we may reasonably 
suspect serves as a sexual charm ; but I shall have to 
recur to this subject in the next chapter. The vocal 
organs of the American Mycetes caraya are one-third 
larger in the male than in the female, and are wonder- 
fully powerful. These monkeys in warm weather 
make the forests resound at morning and evening with 
their overwhelming voices. The males begin the 
dreadful concert, and often continue it during many 
hours, the females sometimes joining in with their 
less powerful voices. An excellent observer, Eengger,’ 
could not perceive that they were excited to begin by 
any special cause ; he thinks that, like many birds, 
they delight in their own music, and try to excel each 
other. Whether most of the foregoing monkeys have 
acquired their powerful voices in order to beat their 
rivals and charm the females — or whether the vocal 
organs have been strengthened and enlarged through 
the inherited effects of long-continued use without any 
particular good being thus gained — I will not pretend 
to say ; but the former view, at least in the case of the 
Hylobates agilis^ seems the most probable. 

I may here mention two very curious sexual pecu- 
liarities occurring in seals, because they have been 

® Mr. Green, in ‘ Journal of Mamm. Animals,’ 1841, p. 431. 
Linn. Soc.’ vol. x. Zoology, 1869, ^ ‘ Naturgeschichte der Sauge- 

n. 362. thiere von Paraguay,’ 1830, sa. 

® C. L. Martin, ‘ General Intro- 15, 21. 
duction to the Nat. Hist, of 


806 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 


supposed by some writers to affect the voice. The 
nose of the male sea-elephant (Macrorhinm probos- 
cideus) becomes greatly elongated during the breeding- 
season, and can then be erected. In this state it is 
sometimes a foot in length. The female is not thus 
provided at any period of life. The male makes a 
wild, hoarse, gurgling noise, which is audible at a 
great distance and is believed to be strengthened by 
the proboscis ; the voice of the female being different. 
Lesson compares the erection of the proboscis, with 
the swelling of the wattles of male gallinaceous birds 
whilst courting the females. In another allied kind of 
seal, the bladder-nose {Cystophora cristata), the head is 
covered by a great hood or bladder. This is supported 
by the septum of the nose, which is produced far 
backwards and rises into an internal crest seven inches 
in height. The hood is clothed with short hair, and is 
muscular ; it can be inflated until it more than equals 
the whole head in size ! The males when rutting, 
fight furiously on the ice, and their roaring “ is said to 
“ be sometimes so loud as to be heard four miles off.” 
When attacked they likewise roar or bellow; and 
whenever irritated the bladder is inflated and quivers. 
Some naturalists believe that the voice is thus 
strengthened, but various other uses have been 
assigned to this extraordinary structure. Mr. E. 
Brown thinks that it serves as a protection against 
accidents of all kinds ; but this is not probable, for, as 
I am assured by Mr. Lament who killed 600 of these 
animals, the hood is rudimentary in the females, and it 
is not developed in the males during youth.® 

®On the sea-elephant, see an Class. Hist. Nat.’ tom. xiii. p. 
article by Lesson, in ‘Diet. 418. For the Cystophora, or 


Chap. XVm. MAMMALS — ODOURS EMITTED. 


807 


Odour . — With some animals, as with the notorious 
skunk of America, the overwhelming odour which they 
emit appears to serve exclusively as a defence.* With 
shrew-mice (Sorex) both sexes possess abdominal scent- 
glands, and there can he little doubt, from the rejection 
of their bodies by birds and beasts of prey, that the 
odour is protective ; nevertheless, the glands become 
enlarged in the males during the breeding-season. In 
many other quadrupeds the glands are of the same 
size in both sexes,® but their uses are not known. In 
other species the glands are confined to the males, or 
are more developed than in the females ; and they 
almost always become more active during the rutting- 
season. At this period the glands on the sides of the 
face of the male elephant enlarge, and emit a secretion 
having a strong musky odour. The males, and rarely 
the females, of many kinds of bats have glands and 
protrudable sacks situated in various parts ; and it is 
believed that these are odoriferous. 

The rank efiluvium of the male goat is well known, 
and that of certain male deer is wonderfully strong 
and persistent. On the banks of the Plata I perceived 
the air tainted with the odour of the male G&rvus 
campestris, at half a mile to leeward of a herd ; and a 


Stemmatopus, see Dr. Dekay, 
‘ Annals of Lyceum of Nat. 
Hist. New York,’ vol. i. 1824, 
p. 94. Pennant has also col- 
lected information from the 
sealers on this animal. The 
fullest account is given by Mr. 
Brown, in * Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 
1868, p. 435. 

* As with the castoreum of the 
beaver, see Mr. L. H. Morgan’s 
most interesting work, ‘ The 


American Beaver,’ 1868, p. 300. 
Pallas (‘ Spic. Zoolog,’ fasc. viii. 
1779, p. 23) has well discussed 
the (Poriferous glands of mam- 
mals. Owen (‘ Anat. of Verte- 
brates,’ vol. iii. p. 634) also 
gives an account of these glands, 
including those of the elephant, 
and (p. 7 63) those of shrew-mice. 
On Bats, Mr. Dobson in ‘ Proc. 
Zoolog. Soc.’ 1873, p. 241. 


808 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past II 


silk handkerchief, in which I carried home a skin, 
though often used and washed, retained, when first 
unfolded, traces of the odour for one year and seven 
months. This animal does not emit its strong odour 
until more than a year old, and if castrated whilst 
young never emits it.^® Besides the general odour, 
permeating the whole body of certain ruminants (for 
instance. Bos moschatus) in the breeding-season, many 
deer, antelopes, sheep, and goats possess odoriferous 
glands in various situations, more especially on their 
faces. The so-called tear-sacks, or suhorhital pits, come 
under this head. These glands secrete a semi-fluid 
fetid matter which is sometimes so copious as to stain 
the whole face, as I have myself seen in an antelope. 
They are “ usually larger in the male than in the 
“ female, and their development is checked by castra- 
tion.”^^ According to Desmarest they are altogether 
absent in the female of Antilope suhgutturosa. Hence, 
there can be no doubt that they stand in close relation 
with the reproductive functions. They are also some- 
times present, and sometimes absent, in nearly allied 
forms. In the adult male musk-deer (Moschus moschi- 
ferus), a naked space round the tail is bedewed with an 
odoriferous fluid, whilst in the adult female, and in the 
male until two years old, this space is covered with 
hair and is not odoriferous. The proper musk-sack of 
this deer is from its position necessarily confined to the 
male, and forms an additional scent-organ. It is a 

Rengger, ‘ Naturgeschichte also Dr. Murie’s observations 
der Saugethiere von Paraguay,’ on these glands in the ‘ Proc. 
1830, 8. 356. This observer also Zoolog. Soc.’ 1870, p. 340. 

gives some curious particulars in Desmarest, On the Antilope 

regard to the odour. suhgutturosa^ ‘ Mamitalogie,’ 

” Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Verte- 1820, p. 466 . 
brates,’ vol. iii. p. 632. See 


Chap. XVIII. MAMMALS — DEVELOPMENT OF HAIE. 809 

singular fact that the matter secreted hy this latter 
gland, does not, according to Pallas, change in consis- 
tence, or increase in quantity, during the rutting- 
season ; nevertheless this naturalist admits that its 
presence is in some way connected with the act of 
reproduction. He gives, however, only a conjectural 
and unsatisfactory explanation of its use.'^ 

In most cases, when only the male emits a strong 
odour during the breeding-season, it probably serves 
to excite or allure the female. We must not judge on 
this head by our own taste, for it is well known that 
rats are enticed by certain essential oils, and cats by 
valerian, substances far from agreeable to us; and that 
dogs, though they will not eat carrion, sniff and roll on 
it. From the reasons given when discussing the voice 
of the stag, we may reject the idea that the odour 
serves to bring the females from a distance to the 
males. Active and long-continued use cannot here 
have come into play, as in the case of the vocal organs. 
The odour emitted must he. of considerable importance 
to the male, inasmuch as large and complex glands, 
furnished with muscles for everting the sack, and for 
closing or opening the orifice, have in some cases been 
developed. The development of these organs is in- 
telligible through sexual selection, if the most 
odoriferous males are the most successful in winning 
the females, and in leaving offspring to inherit their 
gradually perfected glands and odours. 

Development of the Hair . — We have seen that male 
quadrupeds often have the hair on their necks and 

Pallas, ‘Spicilegia Zoolog.’ lins, ‘Diet. Class. d’Hist. Nat* 
fasc. liii. 1799, p. 24 ; Desmou- tom. iii. p. 686. 


810 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


shoulders mucli more developed than the females ; and 
many additional instances could he given. This some- 
times serves as a defence to the male during his 
battles ; but whether the hair in most cases has been 
specially developed for this purpose, is very doubtful. 
,We may feel almost certain that this is not the case, 
when only a thin and narrow crest runs along the 
back ; for a crest of this kind would afford scarcely any 
protection, and the ridge of the back is not a place 
likely to he injured ; nevertheless such crests are 
sometimes confined to the males, or are much more 
developed in them than in the females. Two antelopes, 
the Tragelaphus seriptus^^ (see fig. 70, p. 324) and 
Portax picta may be given as instances. When stags, 
and the males of the wild goat, are enraged or terrified, 
these crests stand erect hut it cannot be supposed 
that they have been developed merely for the sake of 
exciting fear in their enemies. One of the above-named 
antelopes, the Portax picta^ has a large well-defined 
brush of black hair on the throat, and this is much 
larger in the male than in the female. In the Am- 
motragus tragelaphus of North Africa, a member of the 
sheep-family, the fore-legs are almost concealed by an 
extraordinary growth of hair, which depends from the 
neck and upper halves of the legs ; but Mr. Bartlett 
does not believe that this mantle is of the least use to 
the male, in whom it is much more developed than in 
the female. 

Male quadrupeds of many kinds differ from the 

“ Dr. Gray, ‘ Gleanings from ‘ Transact. Ottawa Acad. Nat. 
the Menagerie at Knowsley,’ pi. Sciences,’ 1868, pp. 36, 40 ; 
28. Blyth, ‘Land and Water,’ on 

Judge Caton on the Wapiti, Capra xgagrus, 1867, p. 37. 


Ohap. XVIII. MAMMALS — DEVELOPMENT OF HAIR. 811 

females in having more hair, or hair of a different 
character, on certain parts of their faces. Thus the 
bull alone has curled hair on the forehead.^® In three 
closely-allied sub-genera of the goat family, only the 
males possess beards, sometimes of large size ; in two 
other sub-genera both sexes have a beard, but it dis- 
appears in some of the domestic breeds of the common 
goat ; and neither sex of the Hemitragus has a beard. 
In the ibex the beard is not developed during the 
summer, and it so small at other times that it may 
be called rudimentary.^® With some monkeys the 
beard is confined to the male, as in the orang ; or is 
much larger in the male than in the female, as in the 
Mycetes caraya and Pithecia satanas (fig. 68). So it 
is with the whiskers of some species of Macaous,^^ and, 
as we have seen, with the manes of some species of 
baboons. But with most kinds of monkeys the various 
tufts of hair about the face and head are alike in both 
sexes. 

The males of various members of the ox family 
(Bovidae), and of certain antelopes, are furnished with 
a dewlap, or great fold of skin on the neck, which is 
much less developed in the female. 

Now, what must we conclude with respect to such 
sexual differences as these ? No one will pretend that 
the beards of certain male goats, or the dewlap of the 
bull, or the crests of hair along the backs of certain 
male antelopes, are of any use to them in their ordinary 
habits. It is possible that the immense beard of the 

‘ Hunter’s Essays and Ob- part iii. 1852, p. 144. 
servations,’ edited by Owen, ” Rengger, * Saugethiere,’ &c. 
1861, vol. i. p. 236. s. 14 ; Desmarest, ‘ Marama- 

“ See Dr. Gray’s * Cat. of logie,’ p. 86. 

Mammalia in British Museum,’ 


812 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


male Pithecia, and the large beard of the male orang, 
may protect their throats when fighting; for the 
keepers in the Zoological Gardens inform me that 
many monkeys attack each other by the throat ; but 
it is not probable that the heard has been developed 
for a distinct purpose from that served by the whiskers, 



Fig. 68. Pithecia satanaa, male (from Brehm). 


moustache, and other tufts of hair on the face ; and no 
one will suppose that these are useful as a protection. 
Must we attribute all these appendages of hair or skin 
to mere purposeless variability in the male ? It cannot 
be denied that this is possible ; for in many domesti- 
cated quadrupeds, certain characters, apparently not 
derived through reversion from any wild parent form, 


Ohap. XVIII. MAMMALS — DEVELOPMENT OF HAIR. 813 

are confined to the males, or are more developed in 
them than in the females — for instance, the hump on 
the male zebu-cattle of India, the tail of fat-tailed 
rams, the arched outline of the forehead in the males 
of several breeds of sheep, and, lastly, the mane, the 
long hairs on the hind legs, and the dewlap of the 
male of the Berbura goat.^® The mane, which occurs 
only in the rams of an African breed of sheep, is a 
true secondary sexual character, for, as I hear from 
Mr. Winwood Keade, it is not developed if the animal 
be castrated. Although we ought to be extremely 
cautious, as shewn in my work on ‘ Variation under 
Domestication,’ in concluding that any character, even 
with animals kept by semi-civilised people, has not 
been subjected to selection by man, and thus aug- 
mented, yet in the cases just specified this is 
improbable ; more especially as the characters are 
confined to the males, or are more strongly developed 
in them than in the females. If it were positively 
known that the above African ram is a descendant of 
the same primitive stock as the other breeds of sheep, 
and if the Berbura male-goat with his mane, dewlap, 
&c., is descended from the same stock as other goats, 
then, assuming that selection has not been applied to 
these characters, they must be due to simple variability, 
together with sexually-limited inheritance. 

Hence it appears reasonable to extend this same view 
to all analogous cases with animals in a state of nature. 
Nevertheless I cannot persuade myself that it generally 

See the chapters on these tice of selection by semi-civilised 
several animals in vol i. of my people. For the Berbura goat, 
‘Variation of Animals under see Dr. Gray, ‘ Catalogue/ ibid. 
Domestication ; ’ also vol. ii. p. p. 157. 

73 ; also chap. xx. on the prac- 


814 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


holds good, as in the case of the extraordinary develop- 
ment of hair on the throat and fore-legs of the male 
Ammotragus, or in that of the immense beard of the 
male Pithecia. Such study as I have been able to give 
to nature makes me believe that parts or organs which 
are highly developed, were acquired at some period for 
a special purpose. With those antelopes in which the 
adult male is more strongly-coloured than the female, 
and with those monkeys in which the hair on the face 
is elegantly arranged and coloured in a diversified 
manner, it seems probable that the crests and tufts of 
hair were gained as ornaments ; and this I know is the 
opinion of some naturalists. If this be correct, there 
can be little doubt that they were gained or at least 
modified through sexual selection; but how far the 
same view may be extended to other mammals is 
doubtful. 

Colour of the Hair and of the Naked Shin . — I will 
first give briefly all the cases known to me of male 
quadrupeds differing in colour from the females. With 
Marsupials, as I am informed by Mr. Gould, the sexes 
rarely differ in this respect ; but the great red kangaroo 
offers a striking exception, “ delicate blue being the 
“ prevailing tint in those parts of the female which in 
“the male are red.”^® In the Didelphis opossum of 
Cayenne the female is said to be a little more red than 
the male. Of the Kodents, Dr. Gray remarks : “ African 
“ squirrels, especially those found in the tropical 
“ regions, have the fur much brighter and more vivid 
“ at some seasons of the year than at others, and the 

Osphranter rufus, Gould, vol. ii. On the Didelphis, Des- 
‘ Mammals of Australia,’ 1863, marest, ‘ Mammalogie,’ p. 256. 


Chap. XVIII. MAMMALS — ORNAMENTAL COLOURS. 815 


“ fur of the male is generally brighter than that of the 
“female.”^® Dr. Gray informs me that he specified 
the African squirrels, because, from their unusually 
bright colours, they best exhibit this difiference. The 
female of the Mus minutus of Eussia is of a paler and 
dirtier tint than the male. In a large number of bats 
the fur of the male is lighter than in the female.^^ Mr. 
Dobson also remarks, with respect to these animals : 
“ Difierences, depending partly or entirely on the 
“ possession by the male of fur of a much more brilliant 
“ hue, or distinguished by different markings or by the 
“ greater length of certain portions, are met only, to 
“ any appreciable extent, in the frugivorous bats in 
“ which the sense of sight is well-developed.” This 
last remark deserves attention, as bearing on the 
question whether bright colours are serviceable to 
male animals from being ornamental. In one genus of 
sloths, it is now established, as Dr. Gray states, “ that 
“ the males are ornamented differently from the 
“ females — that is to say, that they have a patch of 
“ soft short hair between the shoulders, which is 
“ generally of a more or less orange colour, and in one 
“ species pure white. The females, on the contrary, 
“ are destitute of this mark.” 

The terrestrial Carnivora and Insectivora rarely 
exhibit sexual differences of any kind, including colour. 
The ocelot (Felis pardalis), however, is exceptional, for 
the colours of the female, compared with those of the 

^ ‘ Annals and Mag. of Nat. bridge, United States,’ 1869, p. 

Hist.’ Nov. 1867, p. 325. On 207. Mr. Dobson on sexual 
the Mus minutus, Desmarest, characters in the Chiroptera, 
‘ Mammalogie,’ p. 304. ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.’ 1873, p. 

® J. A. Allen, in * Bulletin of 241. Dr. Gray on Sloths, ibid. 
Mus. Comp. Zoolog. of Cam- 1871, p. 436. 


816 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II. 


male, are “ moins apparentes, le fauve, etant plus terne, 
“ le blanc moins pur, les raies ayant moins de largeur 
“ et les taches moins de diametre.”^^ The sexes of the 
allied Felis mitis also differ, hut in a less degree ; the 
general hues of the female being rather paler than in 
the male, with the spots less black. The marine 
Carnivora or seals, on the other hand, sometimes differ 
considerably in colour, and they present, as we have 
already seen, other remarkable sexual differences. Thus 
the male of the Otaria nigrescens of the southern 
hemisphere is of a rich brown shade above ; whilst the 
female, who acquires her adult tints earlier in life than 
the male, is dark-grey above, the young of both sexes 
being of a deep chocolate colour. The male of the 
northern Phoca groenlandica is tawny grey, with a 
curious saddle-shaped dark mark on the back; the 
female is much smaller, and has a very different 
appearance, being “ dull white or yellowish straw- 
“ colour, with a tawny hue on the back ; ” the young 
at first are pure white, and can “ hardly be dis- 
“ tinguished among the icy hummocks and snow, their 
“colour thus acting as a protection.”^® 

With Euminants sexual differences of colour occur 
more commonly than in any other order. A difference 
of this kind is general in the Strepsicerene antelopes ; 
thus the male nilghau (Portax pleta) is bluish-grey 
and much darker than the female, with the square 
white patch on the throat, the white marks on the 
fetlocks, and the black spots on the ears all much more 

“ Desmarest, ‘ Mamraalogie,’ Mr. R. Brown on the P. groen- 
1820, p. 220. On Felis Mitis, landica, ibid. 1868, p. 417. See 
Rengger, ibid. s. 194. also on the colours of seals, Des- 

^ Dr. Murie on the Otaria, marest, ibid. pp. 243, 249. 

‘ Prcc. Zool. Soc.’ 1869, p. 108. 


Chap. XVIII. MAMMALS — OKNAMENTAL COLOURS. 817 


distinct. We have seen that in this species the crests 
and tufts of hair are likewise more developed in the 
male than in the hornless female. I am informed by 
Mr. Blyth that the male, without shedding his hair, 
periodically becomes darker during the breeding- 
season. Young males cannot be distinguished from 
young females until about twelve months old; and it 
the male is emasculated before this period, he never, 
according to the same authority, changes colour. The 
importance of this latter fact, as evidence that the 
colouring of the Portax is of sexual origin, becomes 
obvious, when we hear that neither the red summer- 
coat nor the blue winter-coat of the Virginian deer is 
at all affected by emasculation. With most or all of 
the highly-ornamented species of Tragelaphus the 
males are darker than the hornless females, and their 
crests of hair are more fully developed. In the male 
of that magnificent antelope, the Derbyan eland, the 
body is redder, the whole neck much blacker, and the 
white band which separates these colours broader 
than in the female. In the Cape eland, also, the male 
is slightly darker than the female.^® 

In the Indian black-buck (A. bezoartica), which 
belongs to another tribe of antelopes, the male is very 
dark, almost black; whilst the hornless female is 
fawn-coloured. We meet in this species, as Mr. Blyth 
informs me, with an exactly similar series of facts, as 


“ Judge Caton, in ‘Trans. 
Ottawa Acad, of Nat. Sciences,’ 
1868, p. 4. 

“ Dr. Gray, ‘ Cat. of Mamm. 
in Brit. Mus.’ part iii. 1852. 
pp. 134-142; also Dr. Gray, 
‘ Gleanings from the Menagerie 
of Knowsley, in which there is 


a splendid drawing of the Oreas 
derbianus : see the text on 

Tragelaphus. For the Cape 
eland {Oreas canna\ see Andrew 
Smith, ‘Zoology of S. Africa,’ 
pi. 41 and 42. There are also 
many of these Antelopes in the 
Zoological Gardens. 

d G 


818 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part n. 


in the Port ax picta, namely, in the male periodically 
changing colour during the breeding-season, in the 
effects of emasculation on this change, and in the 
young of both sexes being indistinguishable from each 
other. In the Antilope niger the male is black, the 
female, as well as the young of both sexes, being 
brown; in A. sing-sing the male is much brighter 
coloured than the hornless female, and his chest and 
belly are blacker ; in the male A, caama, the marks 
and lines which occur on various parts of the body are 
black, instead of brown as in the female; in the 
brindled gnu (A. gorgon) “ the colours of the male are 
“ nearly the same as those of the female, only deeper 
“and of a brighter hue.”^® Other analogous cases 
could be added. 

The Bant eng bull {Bos sondaicus) of the Malayan 
Archipelago is almost black, with white legs and 
buttocks ; the cow is of a bright dun, as are the young 
males until about the age of three years, when they 
rapidly change colour. The emasculated bull reverts 
to the colour of the female. The female Kemas goat 
is paler, and both it and the female Capra aegagrus are 
said to be more uniformly tinted than their males. 
Deer rarely present any sexual differences in colour. 
Judge Caton, however, informs me that in the males of 
the wapiti deer (Cervus canadensis) the neck, belly, 
and legs are much darker than in the female; but 
during the winter the darker tints gradually fade away 

“ On the Ant. niger ^ see Proc. 1866, vol. ii. p. 627. For the 
Zool. Soc.’ 1850, p. 133. With A. sing-sing^ Gray, ‘ Cat. B. 
respect to an allied sj)ecies, in Mus.’ p. 100. Desmarest, ‘ Mam- 
which there is an equal sexual malogie,’ p. 468, on the A, 
difference in colour, see Sir S. caama. Andrew, Smith, ‘ Zoo- 
Baker, ‘ The Albert Nyanza,’ logy of S. Africa,* on the Gnu, 


Chap. XVm. MAMMALS — ORNAMENTAL COLOURS. 819 


and disappear. I may here mention that Judge Caton 
has in his park three races of the Virginian deer, 
which differ slightly in colour, but the differences are 
almost exclusively confined to the blue winter or 
breeding coat ; so that this case may be compared with 
those given in a previous chapter of closely-allied or 
representative species of birds, which differ from each 
other only in their breeding plumage.^’ The females 
of Gervus paludosus of S. America, as well as the young 
of both sexes, do not possess the black stripes on the 
nose and the blackish-brown line on the breast, which 
are characteristic of the adult males.^® Lastly, as I 
am informed by Mr. Blyth, the mature male of the 
beautifully coloured and spotted axis deer is con- 
siderably darker than the female: and this hue the 
castrated male never acquires. 

The last Order which we need consider is that of the 
Primates. The male of the Lemur macaco is generally 
coal-black, whilst the female is brown.^® Of the 
Quadrumana of the New World, the females and 
young of Mycetes caraya are greyish-yellow and like 
each other ; in the second year the young male be- 
comes reddish-brown ; in the third, black, excepting 
the stomach, which, however, becomes quite black in 
the fourth or fifth year. There is also a strongly- 


^ ‘ Ottawa Academy of Sci- 
ences,’ May 21, 1868, pp. 3. 5. 

“ S. Miiller, on the Banteng, 
‘ Zoog. Indischen Arcbipel.’ 
1839-1844, tab. 35 ; see also 
Raffles, as quoted by Mr. Blyth, 
in ‘ Land and Water,’ 1867, p. 
476. On Goats, Dr. Gray, 
‘ Cat. Brit. Mus.’ p. 146 ; Des- 
marest, ‘ Mammalogie,’ p. 482. 


On the Cervus paludosusy Reng- 
ger, ibid. s. 345. 

^ Sclater, ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.' 
1866, p. i. The same fact has 
also been fully ascertained by 
M M. Pollen and van Dam. See, 
also. Dr. Gray in ‘Annals and 
Mag. of Nat. Hist.’ May 1871, p. 
340. 


820 THE DESCENT OF MAN- Paei H. 

marked difference in colour between the sexes of 
Mycetes seniculus and Cehus capuciivus ; the young of 
the former, and I believe of the latter species, re- 
sembling the females. With Pithecia leueocephala the 
young likewise resemble the females, which are 
brownish-black above and light rusty-red beneath, the 
' adult males being black. The ruff of hair round the 
face of Ateles Tnarginatus is tinted yellow in the male 
and white in the female. Turning to the Old World, 
the males of Eylohates hoolock are always black, with 
the exception of a white band over the brows; the 
females vary from whity-brown to a dark tint mixed 
with black, but are never wholly black. In the 
beautiful Gercopithesus diana, the head of the adult 
male is of an inter le black, whilst that of the female is 
dark grey ; in the former the fur between the thighs 
is of an elegant fawn-colour, in the latter it is paler. 
In the beautiful and curious moustache monkey 
(Cereopithecus cephus) the only difference between the 
sexes is that the tail of the male is chesnut and that 
of the female grey ; but Mr. Bartlett informs me that 
• all the hues become more pronounced in the male 
when adult, whilst in the female they remain as they 
were during youth. According to the coloured figures 
given by Solomon Muller, the male of Semnopithecus 
chrysomelas is nearly black, the female being pale 
brown. In the Cereopithecus cynosurus and griseo- 
viridis one part of the body, which is confined to the 
male sex, is of the most brilliant blue or green, and 

On Mycetes, Rengger, ibid. Blyth, ‘ Land and Water,’ 1867, 
8. 14 ; and Brehm, ‘ Illustrirtes p. 135. On the Semnopithecus, 
Thierleben,’ B. i. s. 96, 107. S. Muller, ‘Zoog. Indischen 
On Ateles Desmarest, ‘ Mam- Archipel.’ tab. x, 
malogie,’ p. 75. On Hylobates, 


Chap. XVIII MAMMALS — ORNAMENTAL COLOURS. 821 

contrasts strikingly with the naked skin on the hinder 
part of the body, which is vivid red. 

Lastly, in the baboon family, the adult male of 
Cynocephalus hamadryas differs from the female not 
only by his immense mane, hut slightly in the colour 



Fig. 69. Hdad of nialo Mandrill (from Qervais, ‘ Hist. Nat. des Mammiferes ’). 

of the hair and of the naked callosities. In the drill 
(G. leuecyphseus) the females and young are much paler- 
coloured, with less green, than the adult males. No 
other member in the whole class of mammals is 
coloured in so extraordinary a manner as the adult 


822 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past EL 


male mandrill {G. mormon). The face at this age 
becomes of a fine blue, with the ridge and tip of the 
nose of the most brilliant red. According to some 
authors, the face is also marked with whitish stripes, 
and is shaded in parts with black, but the colours 
appear to he variable. On the forehead there is a 
crest of hair, and on the chin a yellow beard. 
“Toutes les parties superieures de leurs cuisses et le 
“ grand espace nu de leurs fesses sent egalement 
“ colores du rouge le plus vif, avec un melange de bleu 
“ qui ne manque reellement pas d’elegance.” When 
the animal is excited all the naked parts become much 
more vividly tinted. Several authors have used the 
strongest expressions in describing these resplendent 
colours, which they compare with those of the most 
brilliant birds. Another remarkable peculiarity is 
that when the great canine teeth are fully developed, 
immense protuberances of bone are formed on each 
cheek, which are deeply furrowed longitudinally, and 
the naked skin over them is brilliantly-coloured, as 
just described. (Fig. 69.) In the adult females and 
in the young of both sexes these protuberances are 
scarcely perceptible; and the naked parts are much 
less bright coloured, the face being almost black, 
tinged with blue. In the adult female, however, the 
nose at certain regular intervals of time becomes tinted 
with red. 

In all the cases hitherto given the male is more 

Gervais, * Hist. Nat. des ‘ Mammalogie,’ p. 70. Geoffrey 
Mammiferes,’ 1854, p. 103. St.-Hilaire and P. Cuvier, * Hist 
Figures are given of the skull Nat. des. Mamm.’ 1824, tom. L 
of the male. Also Desmarest, 


Chap. XVIU. MAMMALS — ORNAMENTAL COLOURS. 823 

strongly or brighter coloured than the female, and 
differs from the young of both sexes. But as with 
some few birds it is the female which is brighter 
coloured than the male, so with the Khesus monkey 
(Macacus rhesm)y the female has a large surface of 
naked skin round the tail, of a brilliant carmine red, 
which, as I was assured by the keepers in the Zoo- 
logical Gardens, periodically becomes even yet more 
vivid, and her face also is pale red. On the other 
hand, in the adult male and in the young of both sexes 
(as I saw in the Gardens), neither the naked skin at 
the posterior end of the body, nor the face, shew a 
trace of red. It appears, however, from some published 
accounts, that the male does occasionally, or during 
certain seasons, exhibit some traces of the red. 
Although he is thus less ornamented than the female, 
yet in the larger size of his body larger canine teeth, 
more developed whiskers, more prominent superciliary 
ridges, he follows the common rule of the male ex- 
celling the female. 

I have now given all the cases known to me of a 
difference in colour between the sexes of mammals. 
Some of these may be the result of variations confined 
to one sex and transmitted to the same sex, without 
any good being gained, and therefore without the aid 
of selection. We have instances of this with our 
domesticated animals, as in the males of certain cats 
being rusty-red, whilst the females are tortoise-shell 
coloured. Analogous cases occur in nature : Mr. 
Bartlett has seen many black varieties of the jaguar, 
leopard, vulpine phalanger, and wombat; and he is 
certain that all, or nearly ail these animals, were 


824 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part IL 

males. On the other hand, with wolves, foxes, and 
apparently American squirrels, both sexes are occa- 
sionally born black. Hence it is quite possible that 
with some mammals a difference in colour between the 
sexes, especially when this is congenital, may simply 
be the result, without the aid of selection, of the 
occurrence of one or more variations, which from the 
first were sexually limited in their transmission. 
Nevertheless it is improbable that the diversified, 
vivid, and contrasted colours of certain quadrupeds, 
for instance, of the above monkeys and antelopes, can 
thus be accounted for. We should bear in mind that 
these colours do not appear in the male at birth, but 
only at or near maturity ; and that unlike ordinary 
variations, they are lost if the male be emasculated. 
It is on the whole probable that the strongly-marked 
colours and other ornamental characters of male 
quadrupeds are beneficial to them in their rivalry 
with other males, and have consequently been acquired 
through sexual selection. This view is strengthened 
by the differences in colour between the sexes occur- 
ring almost exclusively, as may be collected from the 
previous details, in those groups and sub-groups of 
mammals which present other and strongly-marked 
secondary sexual characters ; these being likewise due 
to sexual selection. 

Quadrupeds manifestly take notice of colour. Sir S. 
Baker repeatedly observed that the African elephant 
and rhinoceros attacked white or grey horses with 
special fury. I have elsewhere shewn that half- 
wild horses apparently prefer to pair with those of the 

‘ The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,’ 
1868, voL ii. pp. 102, 103. 


Chap. XVm. MAMMALS— ORNAMENTS. 


825 


same colour, and that herds of fallow-deer of different 
colours, though living together, have long kept 
distinct. It is a more significant fact that a female 
zebra would not admit the addresses of a male ass until 
he was painted so as to resemble a zebra, and then, as 
John Hunter remarks, “she received him very readily. 
“ In this curious fact, we have instinct excited by mere 
“ colour, which had so strong an effect as to get the 
“ better of everything else. But the male did not 
“ require this, the female being an animal some- 
“ what similar to himself, was sufficient to rouse 
“ him.” 

In an earlier chapter we have seen that the mental 
powers of the higher animals do not differ in kind, though 
greatly in degree, from the corresponding powers of 
man, especially of the lower and barbarous races ; and 
it would appear that even their taste for the beautiful 
is not widely different from that of the Quadrumana. 
As the negro of Africa raises the flesh on his face into 
parallel ridges “ or cicatrices, high above the natural 
“ surface, which unsightly deformities are considered 
“ great personal attractions ; ” — as negroes and 

savages in many parts of the world paint their faces 
with red, blue, white, or black bars, — so the male 
mandrill of Africa appears to have acquired his deeply- 
furrowed and gaudily- coloured face from having been 
thus rendered attractive to the female. No doubt 
it is to us a most grotesque notion that the posterior 
end of the body should be coloured for the sake of 
ornament even more brilliantly than the face ; but this 

® ‘Essays and Observations ^ Sir S. Baker, ‘The Nile 
by J. Hunter,’ edited by Owen, Tributaries of Abyssinia,’ 1867. 
1861, vol. i. p. 194. 


826 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IX 


is not more strange than that the tails of many birds 
should he especially decorated. 

With mammals we do not at present possess any 
evidence that the males take pains to display their 
charms before the female ; and the elaborate manner 
in which this is performed by male birds and other 
animals is the strongest argument in favour of the 
belief that the females admire, or are excited by, the 
ornaments and colours displayed before them. There 
is, however, a striking parallelism between mammals 
and birds in all their secondary sexual characters, 
namely in their weapons for fighting with rival males, 
in their ornamental appendages, and in their colours. 
In both classes, when the male differs from the female, 
the young of both sexes almost always resemble each 
other, and in a large majority of cases resemble the 
adult female. In both classes the male assumes the 
characters proper to his sex shortly before the age of 
reproduction ; and if emasculated at an early period, 
loses them. In both classes the change of colour is 
sometimes seasonal, and the tints of the naked parts 
sometimes become more vivid during the act of court- 
ship. In both classes the male is almost always more 
vividly or strongly coloured than the female, and is 
ornamented with larger crests of hair or feathers, or 
other such appendages. In a few exceptional cases the 
female in both classes is more highly ornamented than 
the male. With many mammals, and at least in the 
case of one bird, the male is more odoriferous than the 
female. In both classes the voice of the male is more 
powerful than that of the female. Considering this 
parallelism, there can be little doubt that the same 
cause, whatever it may be, has acted on mammals and 


Chap. XVIU. MAMMALS — SPOTS AND STRIPES. 827 

birds ; and the result, as far as ornamental characters 
are concerned, may he attributed, as it appears to me, 
to the long-continued preference of the individuals of 
one sex for certain individuals of the opposite sex, 
combined with their success in leaving a larger number 
of offspring to inherit their superior attractions. 

Equal transmission of ornamental characters to both 
sexes . — With many birds, ornaments, which analogy 
leads us to believe were primarily acquired by the 
males, have been transmitted equally, or almost equally, 
to both sexes ; and we may now enquire how far this 
view applies to mammals. With a considerable number* 
of species, especially of the smaller kinds, both sexes 
have been coloured, independently of sexual selection, 
for the sake of protection ; but not, as far as I can 
judge, in so many cases, nor in so striking a manner, 
as in most of the lower classes. Audubon remarks 
that he often mistook the musk-rat,®® whilst sitting on 
the banks of a muddy stream, for a clod of earth, so 
complete was the resemblance. The hare on her form 
is a familiar instance of concealment through colour ; 
yet this principle partly fails in a closely-allied species, 
the rabbit, for when running to its burrow, it is made 
conspicuous to the sportsman, and no doubt to all 
beasts of prey, by its upturned white tail. No one 
doubts that the quadrupeds inhabiting snow-clad regions 
have been rendered white to protect them from their 
enemies, or to favour their stealing on their prey. In 
regions where snow never lies for long, a white coat 
would be injurious ; consequently, species of this colour 

“ Fiber zibethicus, Audubon and Bachman, ‘ The Quadrupeds 
of N. America,’ 1846, p. 109. 


828 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt II. 


are extremely rare in the hotter parts of the world. 
It deserves notice that many quadrupeds inhabiting 
moderately cold regions, although they do not assume 
a white winter dress, become paler during this season ; 
and this apparently is the direct result of the conditions 
to which they have long been exposed. Pallas^® states 
' that in Siberia a change of this nature occurs with the 
wolf, two species of Mustek, the domestic horse, the 
Eqims hemionuSf the domestic cow, two species of 
antelopes, the musk-deer, the roe, elk, and reindeer. 
The roe, for instance, has a red summer and a greyish- 
white winter coat ; and the latter may perhaps serve 
• as a protection to the animal whilst wandering through 
the leafless thickets, sprinkled with snow and hoar- 
frost. If the above-named animals were gradually to 
extend their range into regions perpetually covered 
with snow, their pale winter-coats would probably be 
rendered through natural selection, whiter and whiter, 
until they became as white as snow. 

Mr. Keeks has given me a curious instance of an 
animal profiting by being peculiarly coloured. He 
raised from fifty to sixty white and brown piebald 
rabbits in a large walled orchard ; and he had at the 
same time some similarly coloured cats in his house. 
Such cats, as I have often noticed, are very conspicuous 
during day ; but as they used to lie in watch during 
the dusk at the mouths of the burrows, the rabbits 
apparently did not distinguish them from their parti- 
coloured brethren. The result was that, within 
eighteen months, every one of these parti-coloured 

^ ‘Novae species Quadrupe- is the Capreolus sibiricus sub- 
dum e Gliriuni ordine,’ 1778, p. ecaudatus of Pallas. 

7. What I have called the roe 


Ohap. XVIII. MAMMALS — SPOTS AND STRIPES. 829 


rabbits was destroyed ; and there was evidence that 
this was effected by the cats. Colour seems to be 
advantageous to another animal, the skunk, in a 
manner of which we have had many instances in other 
classes. No animal will voluntarily attack one of these 
creatures on account of the dreadful odour which it 
emits when irritated ; but during the dusk it would 
not easily be recognised and might be attacked by a 
beast of prey. Hence it is, as Mr. Belt believes,^^ that 
the skunk is provided with a great white bushy tail, 
which serves as a conspicuous warning. 

Although we must admit that many quadrupeds 
have received their present tints either as a protection, 
or as an aid in procuring prey, yet with a host of 
species, the colours are far too conspicuous and too 
singularly arranged to allow us to suppose that they 
serve for these purposes. We may take as an illustra- 
tion certain antelopes ; when we see the square white 
patch on the throat, the white marks on the fetlocks, 
and the round black spots on the ears, all more distinct 
in the male of the Portax pictay than in the female ; — 
when we see that the colours are more vivid, that the 
narrow white lines on the flank and the broad white 
bar on the shoulder are more distinct in the male Oreas 
derhyanus than in the female ; — when we see a similar 
difference between the sexes of the curiously-ornamented 
Tragelaphus scriptus (fig. 70), — we cannot believe that 
differences of this kind are of any service to either sex 
in their daily habits of life. It seems a much more 
probable conclusion that the various marks were first 
acquired by the males and their colours intensified 
through sexual selection, and then partially transferred 
‘ The Naturalist in Nicaragua,’ p. 249, 


830 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt IL 



to the females. If this view be admitted, there can be 
little doubt that the equally singular colours and marks 
of many other antelopes, though common to both sexes, 
have been gained and transmitted in a like manner. 
Both sexes, for instance, of the koodoo (Strejpsiceros 


Fig. 70. Tragelaphus scrlptus, male (from the Knoweley Jfenagerle). 

kudu) (fig. 64) have narrow white vertical lines on 
their hind flanks, and an elegant angular white mark 
on their foreheads. Both sexes in the genus Damalis 
are very oddly coloured ; in D. ^ygarga the back and 


Chap. XVm. MAMMALS — SPOTS AND STRIPES. 831 

neck are purplish-red, shading on the flanks into 
black ; and these colours are abruptly separated from 
the white belly and from a large white space on the 
buttocks ; the head is still more oddly coloured, a large 
oblong white mask, narrowly-edged with black, covers 
the face up to the eyes (fig. 71) ; there are three white 



Fig. 71. Damalis pygarga, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie). 


stripes on the forehead, and the ears are marked with 
white. The fawns of this species are of a uniform 
pale yellowish-brown. In Damalis albifrons the colour- 
ing of the head differs from that in the last species in 
a single white stripe replacing the three stripes, and 


832 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part TL 


in the ears being almost wholly white.^® After having 
studied to the best of my ability the sexual differences 
of animals belonging to all classes, I cannot avoid 
the conclusion that the curiously-arranged colours of 
many antelopes, though common to both sexes, are 
the result of sexual selection primarily applied to the 
male. 

The same conclusion may perhaps be extended to 
the tiger, one of the most beautiful animals in the 
world, the sexes of which cannot he distinguished by 
colour, even by the dealers in wild beasts. Mr. 
Wallace believes®® that the striped coat of the tiger so 
assimilates with the vertical stems of the bamboo, as 
“ to assist greatly in concealing him from his approach- 
‘‘ ing prey.” But this view does not appear to me 
satisfactory. We have some slight evidence that his 
beauty may be due to sexual selection, for in two species 
of Felis the analogous marks and colours are rather 
brighter in the male than in the female. The zebra is 
conspicuously striped, and stripes cannot afford any 
protection on the open plains of South Africa. Bur- 
chell^® in describing a herd says, “ their sleek ribs 
“ glistened in the sun, and the brightness and regularity 
“ of their striped coats presented a picture of extraordi- 
nary beauty, in which probably they are not surpassed 
“by any other quadruped.” But as throughout the 
whole group of the Equidee the sexes are identical in 
colour, we have here no evidence of sexual selection. 
Nevertheless he who attributes the white and dark 

See the fine plates in A. ‘ Westminster Re view, ’July 

Smith’s ‘ Zoology of S. Africa,’ 1, 1867, p. 5. 
and Dr. Gray’s ‘ Gleanings from ‘ Travels in South Africa,^ 

the Menagerie of Kuowsley.’ 1824, vol. ii. p. 315. 


Chap. XVm. MAMMALS —SPOTS AND STRIPES. 833 


yertical stripes on the flanks of various antelopes to 
this process, will probably extend the same view to the 
Royal Tiger and beautiful Zebra. 

We have seen in a former chapter that when young 
animals belonging to any class follow nearly the same 
habits of life as their parents, and yet are coloured in a 
different manner, it may be inferred that they have 
retained the colouring of some ancient and extinct 
progenitor. In the family of pigs, and in the tapirs, 
the young are marked with longitudinal stripes, and 
thus differ from all the existing adult species in these 
two groups. With many kinds of deer the young are 
marked with elegant white spots, of which their parents 
exhibit not a trace. A graduated series can be followed 
from the axis deer, both sexes of which at all ages and 
during all seasons are beautifully spotted (the male 
being rather more strongly coloured than the female), 
to species in which neither the old nor the young are 
spotted. I will specify some of the steps in this series. 
The Mantchurian deer (Gervus mantehuricus) is spotted 
during the whole year, but, as I have seen in the 
Zoological Gardens, the spots are much plainer during 
the summer, when the general colour of the coat is 
lighter, than during the winter, when the general 
colour is darker and the horns are fully developed. 
In the hog-deer (Hyelaphus porcinus) the spots are 
extremely conspicuous during the summer when the 
coat is reddish-brown, but quite disappear during the 
winter when the coat is brown.*^ In both these species 

Dr. Gray, ‘ Gleanings from it is more brightly spotted with 
the Menagerie of Knowsley,’ p. white than the common hog- 
64. Mr. Blyth, in speaking deer, at the season when it re- 
(‘ Land and VN^ater,’ 1869, p. 42) news its horns, 
of the hog-deer of Ceylon, says 


834 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


PiLBT IL 


the young are spotted. In the Virginian deer the 
young are likewise spotted, and about five per cent, of 
the adult animals living in Judge Caton’s park, as I 
am informed by him, temporarily exhibit at the period 
when the red summer coat is being replaced by the 
bluish winter coat, a row of spots on each flank, which 
are always the same in number, though very variable 
in distinctness. From this condition there is but a 
very small step to the complete absence of spots in the 
adults at all seasons ; and, lastly, to their absence at 
all ages and seasons, as occurs with certain species. 
From the existence of this perfect series, and more 
especially from the fawns of so many species being 
spotted, we may conclude that the now living members 
of the deer family are the descendants of some ancient 
species which, like the axis deer, was spotted at all 
ages and seasons. A still more ancient progenitor 
probably somewhat resembled the Eyomoschus aquati- 
Gus — for this animal is spotted, and the hornless males 
have large exserted canine teeth, of which some few true 
deer still retain rudiments. Hyomoschus, also, offers 
one of those interesting cases of a form linking together 
two groups, for it is intermediate in certain osteo- 
logical characters between the pachyderms and ru- 
minants, which were formerly thought to be quite 
distinct.*^ 

A curious difficulty here arises. If we admit that 
coloured spots and stripes were first acquired as orna- 
ments, how comes it that so many existing deer, the 
descendants of an aboriginally spotted animal, and all 
the species of pigs and tapirs, the descendants of an 

“ Falconer and Cautley, Falconer’s ‘ Pal. Memoirs,’ vol 
* Proc. Greolog. Soc.’ 1843 ; and i. p. 196. 


Chak XVIIl. MAMMALS — SPOTS AND STRIPES. 835 


aboriginally striped animal, have lost in their adnlt 
state their former ornaments ? I cannot satisfactorily 
answer this question. We may feel almost sure that 
the spots and stripes disappeared at or near maturity 
in the progenitors of our existing species, so that they 
were still retained by the young ; and, owing to the 
law of inheritance at corresponding ages, were trans- 
mitted to the young of all succeeding generations. It 
may have been a great advantage to the lion and 
puma, from the open nature of their usual haunts, to 
have lost their stripes, and to have been thus rendered 
less conspicuous to their prey ; and if the successive 
variations, by which this end was gained, occurred 
rather late in life, the young would have retained their 
stripes, as is now the case. As to deer, pigs, and 
tapirs, Fritz Muller has suggested to me that these 
animals, by the removal of their spots or stripes 
through natural selection, would have been less easily 
seen by their enemies ; and that they would have 
especially required this protection, as soon as the 
carnivora increased in size and number during the 
tertiary periods. This may be the true explanation, 
but it is rather strange that the young should not 
have been thus protected, and still more so that the 
adults of some species should have retained their spots, 
either partially or completely, during part of the year. 
We know that, when the domestic ass varies and 
becomes reddish-brown, grey, or black, the stripes on 
the shoulders and even on the spine frequently dis- 
appear, though we cannot explain the cause. Very 
few horses, except dun-coloured kinds, have stripes on 
any part of their bodies, yet we have good reason to 
believe that the aboriginal horse was striped on the 


836 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part II 



legs and spine, and probably on the shoulders.'^^ Hence 
the disappearance of the spots and stripes in our adult 
existing deer, pigs, and tapirs, may be due to a change 
in the general colour of their coats ; but whether this 
change was eiffected through sexual or natural selection, 
or was due to the direct action of the conditions of life^ 


Fig. 72. Head of Semnopithecus rubicundus. This and the following figures (from 
Prof. Gervais) are given to shew the odd arrangement and development of the 
hair on the head. 

or to some other unknown cause, it is impossible to 
decide. An observation made by Mr. Sclater well 
illustrates our ignorance of the laws which regulate 
the appearance and disappearance of stripes; the 

" ‘The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestic*- 
tioD,’ 1868, vol. i. pp, 61-64. 


Chap. XVIII. BEAUTY OF THE QUADRUMANA. 887 


species of Asinus which inhabit the Asiatic continent 
are destitute of stripes, not having even the cross 
shoulder- stripe, whilst those which inhabit Africa are 
conspicuously striped, with the partial exception of 
A. t8enio]puSy which has only the cross shoulder-stripe 
and generally some faint bars on the legs ; and this 
species inhabits the almost intermediate region of 
Upper Egypt and Abyssinia.'^^ 

Qiiadrumana . — Before we conclude, it will be well 
to add a few remarks on the ornaments of monkeys. 
In most of the species the sexes resemble each other in 
colour, but in some, as we have seen, the males difier 
from the females, especially in the colour of the naked 
parts of the skin, in the development of the beard, 
whiskers, and mane. Many species are coloured either 
in so extraordinary or so beautiful a manner, and are 
furnished with such curious and elegant crests of hair, 
that we can hardly avoid looking at these characters 
as having been gained for the sake of ornament. The 
accompanying figures (figs. 72 to 76) serve to shew the 
arrangement of the hair on the face and head in several 
species. It is scarcely conceivable that these crests of 
hair, and the strongly contrasted colours of the fur 
and skin, can be the result of mere variability without 
the aid of selection ; and it is inconceivable that they 
can be of use in any ordinary way to these animals. 
If so, they have probably been gained through sexual 
selection, though transmitted equally, or almost 
equally, to both sexes. With many of the Quadru- 
mana, we have additional evidence of the action of 

** ‘ Proc. Zool. Soc.’ 1862, p. * Ann. d. Landwr.* Bd. xliii s. 
164:. See, also, Dr. Hartmann, 222. 


838 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IL 


sexual selection in tlie greater size and strength of the 
males, and in the greater development of their canine 
teeth, in comparison with the females. 

A few instances will suffice of the strange manner in 



Fig. 73. Head of Semuopitbecus comatua. 


Fig. 74. Head of Cebus capucinus. 




Fig. 76. Head of Atele.s marglnatas. Fig. 76. Head of Cebus vellerosus. 

which both sexes of some species are coloured, and of 
the beauty of others. The face of the Cercopithecus 
'petaurista (fig. 77) is black, the whiskers and beard 
being white, with a defined, round, white spot on the 
nose, covered with short white hair, which gives to 



Chap. XVTII BEAUTY OF THE QUADRUMANA. «39 
the animal an almost ludicrous aspect. The 8em/nopi- 


Flg. 77. Ceroopithecu* peUuiista (from Brehui). 

theciLS frontatus likewise has a blackish face with a long 


il.iiilisiiiiii 


840 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


black beard, and a large naked spot on the forehead of 
a bluish-white colour. The face of Maeacus lasiotus is 
dirty flesh-coloured, with a defined red spot on each 
cheek. The appearance of Cercoeebus sethiops is gro- 
tesque, with its black face, white whiskers and collar, 
chestnut head, and a large naked white spot over each 
^eyelid. In very many species, the beard, whiskers, 
and crests of hair round the face are of a different 
colour from the rest of the head, and when different, 
are always of a lighter tint,*® being often pure white, 
sometimes bright yellow, or reddish. The whole face 
of the South American Braehyurus calvus is of a glow- 
“ ing scarlet hue ; ” but this colour does not appear 
until the animal is nearly mature.*® The naked skin 
of the face differs wonderfully in colour in the various 
species. It is often brown or flesh-colour, with parts 
perfectly white, and often as black as that of the most 
sooty negro. In the Braehyurus the scarlet tint is 
brighter than fchat of the most blushing Caucasian 
damsel. It is sometimes more distinctly orange than 
in any Mongolian, and in several species it is blue, 
passing into violet or grey. In all the species known 
to Mr. Bartlett, in which the adults of both sexes have 
strongly-coloured faces, the colours are dull or absent 
during early youth. This likewise holds good with 
the mandril and Ehesus, in which the face and the 
posterior parts of the body are brilliantly coloured in 
one sex alone. In these latter cases we have reason to 
believe that the colours were acquired through sexual 

^ I observed this fact in the Mammif feres,’ tom. i. 1824. 
Zoological Gardens ; and many Bates, * The Naturalist on 

oases may be seen in the coloured the Amazons,’ 1863, vol. ii. p. 
plates in Geoffrey St. -Hilaire 310. 
and F. Cuvier, ‘ Hist. Nat. de» 


Chap. XVIII. BEAUTY OF THE QUADRUMANA. 841 

selection ; and we are naturally led to extend the same 
view to the foregoing species, though both sexes when 
adult have their faces coloured in the same manner. 

Although many kinds of monkeys are far from 
beautiful according to our taste, other species are 
universally admired for their elegant appearance and 
bright colours. The Semno'pitliecus nemasus, though 
peculiarly coloured, is described as extremely pretty ; 
the orange-tinted face is surrounded by long whiskers 
of glossy whiteness, with a line of chestnut-red over 
the eyebrows ; the fur on the hack is of a delicate 
grey, with a square patch on the loins, the tail and 
the fore- arms being of a pure white ; a gorget of 
chestnut surmounts the chest ; the thighs are black, 
with the legs chestnut-red. I will mention only two 
other monkeys for their beauty ; and I have selected 
these as presenting slight sexual differences in colour, 
which renders it in some degree probable that both 
sexes owe their elegant appearance to sexual selection. 
In the moustache-monkey {Gercoj^thecus cephus) the 
general colour of the fur is mottled- greenish with the 
throat white ; in the male the end of the tail is chest- 
nut, but the face is the most ornamented part, the 
skin being chiefly bluish-grey, shading into a blackish 
tint beneath the eyes, with the upper lip of a delicate 
blue, clothed on the lower edge with a thin black 
moustache; the whiskers are orange-coloured, with 
the upper part black, forming a hand which extends 
backwards to the ears, the latter being clothed with 
whitish hairs. In the Zoological Society’s Gardens I 
have often overheard visitors admiring the beauty of 
another monkey, deservedly called Gercopithems diana 
(fig. 78); the general colour of the fur is grey; the 



842 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part II 

chest and inner surface of the forelegs are white ; a 
large triangular defined space on the hinder part of 
the back is rich chestnut ; in the male the inner sides 


Fig. ?8, Ceroopith«cos dUna (from Brehm). 

of the thighs and the abdomen are delicate fawn* 
coloured, and the top of the head is black ; the face 
and ears are intensely black, contrasting finely with a 
white transverse crest over the eyebrows and a long 


. Chap. XVIII. 


MAMMALS — SUIVIMARY. 


843 


white peaked beard, of which the basal portion is 
black.*’ 

In these and many other monkeys, the beanty and 
singular arrangement of their colours, and still more 
the diversified and elegant arrangement of the crests 
and tufts of hair on their heads, force the conviction 
on my mind that these characters have been acquired 
through sexual selection exclusively as ornaments. 

Svmmary . — The law of battle for the possession of 
the female appears to prevail throughout the whole 
great class of mammals. Most naturalists will admit 
that the greater size, strength, courage, and pugnacity 
of the male, his special weapons of offence, as well as 
his special means of defence, have been acquired or 
modified through that form of selection which I have 
called sexual. This does not depend on any superiority 
in the general struggle for life, but on certain individ- 
uals of one sex, generally the male, being successful in 
conquering other males, and leaving a larger number 
of offspring to inherit their superiority than do the 
less successful males. 

There is another and more peaceful kind of contest, 
in which the males endeavour to excite or allure the 
females by various charms. This is probably carried 
on in some cases by the powerful odours emitted by 
the males during the breeding-season ; the odoriferous 
glands having been acquired through sexual selection. 
Whether the same view can be extended to the voice is 
doubtful, for the vocal organs of the males must have 

I have seen most of the nemxus is taken from Mr. W. 

above monkeys in the Zoolo- C. Martin’s ‘Nat. Hist, of 

gical Society’s Gardens. The Mammalia,’ 184], p. 460; see 

description of the Semnopitkecifs also pp. 475, 523. 


844 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part II. 


been strengthened by use during maturity, under the 
powerful excitements of love, jealousy or rage, and will 
consequently have been transmitted to the same sex. 
Various crests, tufts, and mantles of hair, which are 
either confined to the male, or are more developed in 
this sex than in the female, seem in most cases to be 
merely ornamental, though they sometimes serve as a 
defence against rival males. There is even reason to 
suspect that the branching horns of stags, and the 
elegant horns of certain antelopes, though properly 
serving as weapons of offence or defence, have been 
partly modified for ornament. 

When the male differs in colour from the female, he 
generally exhibits darker and more strongly-contrasted 
tints. We do not in this class meet with the splendid 
red, blue, yellow, and green tints, so common with male 
birds and many other animals. The naked parts, 
however, of certain Quadrumana must be excepted ; 
for such parts, often oddly situated, are brilliantly 
coloured in some species. The colours of the male in 
other cases may be due to simple variation, without the 
aid of selection. But when the colours are diversified 
and strongly pronounced, when they are not developed 
until near maturity, and when they are lost after 
emasculation, we can hardly avoid the conclusion that 
they have been acquired through sexual selection for 
the sake of ornament, and have been transmitted exclu- 
sively, or almost exclusively, to the same sex. When both 
sexes are coloured in the same manner, and the colours 
are conspicuous or curiously arranged, without being of 
the least apparent use as a protection, and especially 
when they are associated with various other ornamental 
appendages, we are led by analogy to the same con- 


Chap. XVIII. 


MAMMALS — SUMM A R Y. 


845 


elusion, namely, that they have been acquired through 
sexual selection, although transmitted to both sexes. 
That conspicuous and diversified colours, whether 
confined to the males or common to both sexes, are as 
a general rule associated in the same groups and sub- 
groups with other secondary sexual characters serving 
for war or for ornament, will be found to hold good, if 
we look back to the various cases given in this and the 
last chapter. 

The law of the equal transmission of characters to 
both sexes, as far as colour and other ornaments are 
concerned, has prevailed far more extensively with 
mammals than with birds ; but weapons, such as horns 
and tusks, have often been transmitted either exclu- 
sively or much more perfectly to the males than to the 
females. This is surprising, for, as the males generally 
use their weapons for defence against enemies of all 
kinds, their weapons would have been of service to the 
females. As far as we can see, their absence in this 
sex can be accounted for only by the form of inheritance 
which has prevailed. Finally, with quadrupeds the 
contest between the individuals of the same sex, 
whether peaceful or bloody, has, with the rarest excep- 
tions, been confined to the males ; so that the latter 
have been modified through sexual selection, far more 
commonly than the females, either for fighting with 
each other or for alluring the opposite sex. 


846 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt ni 


Part III. 

SEXUAL SELECTION IN RELATION TO 
MAN, 

AND CONCLUSION. 


CHAPTER XIX 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Man. 

Differences between man and woman — Causes of sucii differences 
and of certain characters common to both sexes — Law of 
battle — Differences in mental powers, and voice — On the 
influence of beauty in determining the marriages of mankind — 
Attention paid by savages to ornaments — Their ideas of beauty 
in woman — ^The tendency to exaggerate each natural peculiarity. 

With mankind tlie diflferences between the sexes are 
greater than in most of tbe Quadrumana, but not so 
great as in some, for instance, the mandrill. Man on 
an average is considerably taller, heavier, and, stronger 
than woman, with squarer shoulders and more plainly - 
pronounced muscles. Owing to the relation which 
exists between muscular development and the projec- 
tion of the brows, ^ the superciliary ridge is generally 
more marked in man than in woman. His body, and 

* Schaaffhauseu, translation in ‘Anthropological Review,* Oct. 
1868, pp. 419, 420, 427. 


Chap. XIX. MAN — SEXUAL DIFFERENCES. 


847 


especially his face, is more hairy, and his voice has a 
different and more powerful tone. In certain races the 
women are said to differ slightly in tint from the men. 
For instance, Schweinfurth, in speaking of a negress 
belonging to the Monbuttoos, who inhabit the interior 
of Africa a few degrees north of the Equator, says, 
‘‘ Like all her race, she had a skin several shades 
“ lighter then her husband’s, being something of the 
“ colour of half-roasted coffee.” ^ As the women labour 
in the fields and are quite unclothed, it is not likely 
that they differ in colour from the men owing to 
less exposure to the weather. European women are 
perhaps the brighter coloured of the two sexes, as may 
be seen when both have been equally exposed. 

Man is more courageous, pugnacious and energetic 
than woman, and has a more inventive genius. His 
brain is absolutely larger, but whether or not propor- 
tionately to his larger body, has not, I believe, been 
fully ascertained. In woman the face is rounder ; the 
jaws and the base of the skull smaller; the outlines 
of the body rounder, in parts more prominent ; and 
her pelvis is broader than in man ; ^ but this latter 
character may perhaps be considered rather as a 
primary than a secondary sexual character. She comes 
to maturity at an earlier age than man. 

As with animals of all classes, so with man, the 
distinctive characters of the male sex are not fully 
developed until he is nearly mature ; and if emasculated 
they never appear. The beard, for instance, is a 

‘ The Heart of Africa,’ pp. 351-356. The comparison 
English Transl. 1873, vol. i. p. of the form of the skull in men 
544. and women has been followed 

* Ecker, translation in ‘ Ah- out with much care by Welcker. 
thropological Review,’ Oct. 1868, 


848 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IIL 


secondary sexual character, and male children are 
beardless, though at an early age they have abundant 
hair on the head. It is probably due to the rather 
late appearance in life of the successive variations 
whereby man has acquired his masculine characters, 
that they are transmitted to the male sex alone. Male 
and female children resemble each other closely, like 
the young of so many other animals in which the adult 
sexes differ widely ; they likewise resemble the mature 
female much more closely than the mature male. The 
female, however, ultimately assumes certain distinctive 
characters, and in the formation of her skull, is said 
to be intermediate between the child and the man.^ 
Again, as the young of closely allied though distinct 
species do not differ nearly so much from each other as 
do the adults, so it is with the children of the different 
races of man. Some have even maintained that race- 
differences cannot be detected in the infantile skull.® 
In regard to colour, the new-born negro child is reddish 
nut-brown, which soon becomes slaty- grey ; the black 
colour being fully developed within a year in the 
Soudan, but not until three years in Egypt. The eyes 
of the negro are at first blue, and the hair chestnut- 
brown rather than black, being curled only at the ends. 
The children of the Australians immediately after birth 
are yellowish-brown, and become dark at a later age. 
Those of the Guaranys of Paraguay are whitish-yellow, 
but they acquire in the course of a few weeks the 
yellowish-brown tint of their parents. Similar obser- 
vations have been made in other parts of America.® 

* Ecker and Welcker, ibid. pp. * Schaaifhausen, * Anthroi)0- 
362, 355 ; Vogt, ‘ Lectures on log. Review,’ ibid. p. 429. 

Man,’ Eng. translat. p. 81. ® Pruner-Boy, on negro infants 


Chap. XIX. MAN — SEXUAL DIFFERENCES. 849 

I have specified the foregoing differences between 
the male and female sex in mankind, because they are 
curiously like those of the Quadrumana. With these 
animals the female is mature at an earlier age than the 
male ; at least this is certainly the case in Gehus azaras."^ 
The males of most species are larger and stronger than 
the females, of which fact the gorilla affords a well- 
known instance. Even in so trifling a character as the 
greater prominence of the superciliary ridge, the 
males of certain monkeys differ from the females,® and 
agree in this respect with mankind. In the gorilla and 
certain other monkeys, the cranium of the adult male 
presents a strongly-marked sagittal crest, which is 
absent in the female ; and Ecker found a trace of 
a similar difference between the two sexes in the 
Australians.® With monkeys when there is any 
difference in the voice, that of the male is the more 
powerful. We have seen that certain male monkeys 
have a well-developed beard, which is quite deficient, 
or much less developed in the female. No instance is 
known of the J)eard, whiskers, or moustache being 
larger in the female than in the male monkey. Even 
in the colour of the beard there is a curious parallelism 
between man and the Quadrumana, for with man when 


as quoted by Vogt, ‘ Lectures on 
Man,’ Eng. translat. 1864, p. 
189 : for further facts on negro 
infants, as quoted from Winter- 
bottom and Camper, see Law- 
rence, ‘ Lectures on Physiology,’ 
&c. 1822, p. 451. For the 
infants of the Guaranys, see 
Rengger, ‘ Saugethiere,’ &c. s. 3. 
See dso Godron, ‘ De I’Espece,’ 
tom. ii. 1859, p. 253. For the 
Australians, Waitz, ‘Introduct. 


to Anthropology,’ Eng. translat. 
1863, p. 99. 

’ Rengger, ‘ Saugethiere,’ &c. 
1830, s. 49. 

• As in Macacus cynomolgus 
(Desmarest, ‘ Mammalogie,’ p. 
65), and in Eylohates agilis 
(Geofifroy St.-Hilaire and F. 
Cuvier, ‘ Hist. Nat. des Mamm.’ 
1824, tom. i. p. 2). 

• ‘ Anthropological Review,’ 
Oct 1868, p. 363. 

3l 


850 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III 


the beard differs in colour from the hair of the head, as 
is commonly the case, it- is, I believe, almost always 
of a lighter tint, being often reddish. I have repeat- 
edly observed this fact in England ; but two gentle- 
men have lately written to me, saying that they form 
an exception to the rule. One of these gentlemen 
accounts for the fact by the wide dilference in colour of 
the hair on the paternal and maternal sides of his 
family. Both had been long aware of this peculiarity 
(one of them having often been accused of dyeing his 
beard), and had been thus led to observe other men, 
and were convinced that the exceptions were very rare. 
Dr. Hooker attended to this little point for me in 
Eussia, and found no exception to the rule. In Calcutta, 
Mr. J. Scott, of the Botanic Gardens, was so kind as to 
observe the many races of men to be seen there, as well 
as in some other parts of India, namely, two races of 
Sikhim, the Bhoteas, Hindoos, Burmese, and Chinese, 
most of which races have very little hair on the 
face ; and he always found that when there was any 
difference in colour between the hair of the head and 
the beard, the latter was invariably lighter. Now with 
monkeys, as has already been stated, the beard fre- 
quently differs strikingly in colour from the hair of the 
head, and in such cases it is always of a lighter hue, 
being often pure white, sometimes yellow or reddish.^” 

Mr. Blyth informs me that “ markably long and human- 

he has only seen one instance of “ like.” Altogether this old 

the heard, whiskers, &c., in a monkey presented a ludicrous 

monkey becoming white with resemblance to one of the 

old age, as is so commonly the reigning monarchs of Europe, 

case with us. Th.is, however, after whom he was universally 

occurred in an aged Macacus, nick-named. In certain race s of 

cynomolgus, kept in confinement man the hair on the head hardly 

whose moustaches were “ re- ever becomes grey ; thus Mr. X). 


Chap. XIX. MAN — SEXUAL DIFFERENCES. 851 

In regard to the general hairiness of the body, the 
women in all races are less hairy than the men ; and 
in some few Quadrumana the under side of the body of 
the female is less hairy than that of the male.^^ Lastly, 
male monkeys, like men, are bolder and fiercer than 
the females. They lead the troop, and when there is 
danger, come to the front. We thus see how close is 
the parallelism between the sexual differences of man 
and the Quadrumana. With some few species, how- 
ever, as with certain baboons, the orang and the gorilla, 
there is a considerably greater difference between the 
sexes, as in the size of the canine teeth, in the develop- 
ment and colour of the hair, and especially in the colour 
of the naked parts of the skin, than in mankind. 

All the secondary sexual characters of man are 
highly variable, even within the limits of the same 
race ; and they differ much in the several races. These 
two rules hold good generally throughout the animal 
kingdom. In the excellent observations made on board 
the Novaray^'^ the male Australians were found to ex- 
ceed the females by only 65 millim. in height, whilst 
with the Javans the average excess was 218 millim. ; 
so that in this latter race the difference in height be- 
tween the sexes is more than thrice as great as with 
the Australians. Numerous measurements were care- 


Forbes has never, as he informs 
me, seen an instance with the 
Aymaras and Quichuas of S. 
America. 

This is the case with the 
females of several species of 
Hylobates, see Geoffroy 8t.- 
Hiliare and F. Cuvier, ‘Hist. 
Nat. des Mamm.’ tom. L See, 


also, on H. lar. ‘ Penny Cyclo- 
pedia,’ vol. ii. pp. 149, 150. 

The results were deduced by 
Dr. Weisbach from the measure- 
ments made by Drs. K. Scherzer 
and Schwarz, see ‘ Pieise der 
Novara: Anthropolog. Theil,’ 
1867, ss. 216, 231, 234, 236, 
239, 269. 


862 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part Ul 


fully made of the stature, the circumference of the neck 
and chest, the length of the back-bone and of the arms, 
in various races; and nearly all these measurements 
shew that the males differ much more from one another 
than do the females. This fact indicates that, as far as 
these characters are concerned, it is the male which has 
been chiefly modified, since the several races diverged 
from their common stock. 

The development of the beard and the hairiness of 
the body differ remarkably in the men of distinct races, 
and even in different tribes or families of the same 
race. We Europeans see this amongst ourselves. In 
the Island of St. Kilda, according to Martin, the men 
do not acquire beards until the age of thirty or up- 
wards, and even then the beards are very thin. On the 
Europseo- Asiatic continent, beards prevail until we pass 
beyond India ; though with the natives of Ceylon they 
are often absent, as was noticed in ancient times by 
Diodorus.^^ Eastward of India beards disappear, as 
with the Siamese, Malays, Kalmucks, Chinese, and 
Japanese; nevertheless the Ainos,^® who inhabit the 
northernmost islands of the Japan Archipelago, are the 
hairiest men in the world. With negroes the beard is 
scanty or wanting, and they rarely have whiskers ; in 
both sexes the body is frequently almost destitute of 
fine down.^® On the other hand, the Papuans of the 


13 < Voyage to St. Kilda ’ (3rd 
edit. 1753), p. 37. 

Sir J. E. Tennent, ‘ Ceylon,’ 
vol. ii. 1859, p. 107. 

Quatrefages, ‘ Kevue des 
Gours Scientifiques,’ Aug. 29, 
1868, p. 630 ; Vogt, ‘ Lectures 
on Man,’ Eng. trauslat. p. 127. 

On the beards of negroes, 


Vogt, ‘ Lectures,’ &c. p. 127 ; 
Waitz, ‘Introduce to Anthro- 
polo^,’ Engl, translat. 1863, 
vol. i. p. 96. It is remarkable 
that in the United States (‘ In- 
vestigations in Military and 
Anthropological Statistics of 
American Soldiers,’ 1869, p. 
569) the pure negroes and their 


Chap. XIX. MAN — SEXUAL DIFFERENCES. 


853 


Malay Archipelago, who are nearly as black as negroes, 
possess well-developed beards.^’ In the Pacific Ocean 
the inhabitants of the Fiji Archipelago have large 
bushy beards, whilst those of the not distant archi- 
pelagoes of Tonga and Samoa are beardless ; but these 
men belong to distinct races. In the Ellice group all 
the inhabitants belong to the same race ; yet on one 
island alone, namely Nunemaya, “ the men have splendid 
“ beards ; ” whilst on the other islands “ they have, as a 
“ rule, a dozen straggling hairs for a beard.” 

Throughout the great American continent the men 
may be said to be beardless; but in almost all the 
tribes a few short hairs are apt to appear on the face, 
especially in old age. With the tribes of North 
America, Gatlin estimates that eighteen out of twenty 
men are completely destitute by nature of a beard; 
but occasionally there may be seen a man, who has 
neglected to pluck out the hairs at puberty, with a soft 
beard an inch or two in length. The Guaranys of 
Paraguay differ from all the surrounding tribes in 
having a small beard, and even some hair on the body, 
but no whiskers.^® I am informed by Mr. D. Forbes, 
who particularly attended to this point, that the Ay- 
maras and Quichuas of the Cordillera are remarkably 
hairless, yet in old age a few straggling hairs occasion- 
ally appear on the chin. The men of these two tribes 


crossed offspriug seem to have 191. 

bodies almost as hairy as Euro- Gatlin, ‘ North American 

peans. Indians,’ 3rd edit. 1842, vol. ii. 

” Wallace, ‘The Malay Arch.’ p. 227. On the Guaranys, see 
vol. ii. 1869, p. 178. Azara, ‘ Voyages dans I’Ameri- 

” Dr. J. Barnard Davis On que M^rid.’ tom. ii. 1809, p. 68 ; 
Oceanic Races, in ‘ Anthropolog. also Rengger, ‘ Saugothiere von 
Review,’ April, 1870, pp. 186, Paraguay,’ s. 3. 


854 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt III. 


have very little hair on the various parts of the body 
where hair grows abundantly in Europeans, and the 
women have none on the corresponding parts. The 
hair on the head, however, attains an extraordinary 
length in both sexes, often reaching almost to the 
ground ; and this is likewise the case with some of the 
N. American tribes. In the amount of hair, and in 
the general shape of the body, the sexes of the Ameri- 
can aborigines do not differ so much from each other, 
as in most other races.^° This fact is analogous with 
what occurs with some closely allied monkeys; thus 
the sexes of the chimpanzee are not as different as 
those of the orang or gorilla.^^ 

In the previous chapters we have seen that with 
mammals, birds, fishes, insects, &c., many characters, 
which there is every reason to believe were primarily 
gained through sexual selection by one sex, have been 
transferred to the other. As this same form of trans- 
mission has apparently prevailed much with mankind, 
it will save useless repetition if we discuss the origin 
of characters peculiar to the male sex together with 
certain other characters common to both sexes. 


Law of Battle . — With savages, for instance, the 
Australians, the women are the constant cause of war 
both between members of the same tribe and between 
distinct tribes. So no doubt it was in ancient times ; 
“ nam fuit ante Helenam mulier teterrima belli causa.” 


Prof, and Mrs. Agassiz 
(‘Journey in Brazil,’ p. 530) 
remark that the sexes of the 
American Indians differ less 
than those of the negroes and 
of the higher races. See also 


Kengger, ibid. p. 3, on the 
Q-uaranys. 

liiitimeyer, ‘ Die Grenzen 
der Thierwelt ; eine Betrach- 
tung zu Darwin’s Lehre,’ 1868, 
s. 54. 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — LAW OF BATTLE. 


855 


With some ot the North American Indians, the contest 
is reduced to a system. That excellent observer, 
Hearne,^^ says : — “ It has ever been the custom among 

these people for the men to wrestle for any woman to 
“ whom they are attached ; and, of course, the strongest 
“ party always carries oflP the prize. A weak man, unless 
“ he he a good hunter, and well-beloved, is seldom per- 
‘‘mitted to keep a wife that a stronger man thinks 

worth his notice. This custom prevails throughout 
“all the tribes, and causes a great spirit of emulation 
“ among their youth, who are upon all occasions, from 
“ their childhood, trying their strength and skill in 
“ wrestling.” With the Guanas of South America, Azara 
states that the men rarely marry till twenty years old or 
more, as before that age they cannot conquer their rivals. 

Other similar facts could be given ; hut even if we 
had no evidence on this head, we might feel almost sure, 
from the analogy of the higher Quadrumana,^^ that the 
law of battle had prevailed with man during the early 
stages of his development. The occasional appearance 
at the present day of canine teeth which project above 
the others, with traces of a diastema or open space for 
the reception of the opposite canines, is in all proba- 
bility a case of reversion to a former state, when the 
progenitors of man were provided with these weapons, 
like so many existing male Quadrumana. It was 
remarked in a former chapter that as man gradually 

“ ‘ A Journey from Prince of p. 94. 

Wales Fort.’ 8vo. edit. Dublin, “ On the lighting of the male 
1796, p. 104. Sir J. Lubbock gorillas, see Dr. Savage, in 
(‘Origin of Civilisation,’ 1870, ‘Boston Journal of Nat. Hist.’ 
p. 69) gives other and similar vol. v. 1847, p. 423. On Pres- 
cases in North America. For b^iis enteJlus^ see the ‘Indian 
the Guanas of S. America see Field,’ 1859, p. 146. 

Azara, ‘ Voyages,’ &c. tom. ii. 


856 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Part HI. 

became erect, and continually used his hands and arms 
for fighting with sticks and stones, as well as for the- 
other purposes of life, he would have used his jaws and 
teeth less and less. The jaws, together with their 
muscles, would then have been reduced through -disuse, 
as would the teeth through the not well understood 
principles of correlation and economy of growth ; for 
we everywhere see that parts, which are no longer 
of service, are reduced in size. By such steps the 
original inequality between the jaws and teeth in the 
two sexes of mankind would ultimately have been 
obliterated. The case is almost parallel with that of 
many male Kuminants, in which the canine teeth have 
been reduced to mere rudiments, or have disappeared, 
apparently in consequence of the development of horns. 
As the prodigious difference between the skulls of the 
two sexes in the orang and gorilla stands in close 
relation with the development of the immense canine 
teeth in the males, we may infer that the reduction 
of the jaws and teeth in the early male progenitors of 
man must have led to a most striking and favourable 
change in his appearance. 

There can be little doubt that the greater size and 
strength of man, in comparison with woman, together 
with his broader shoulders, more developed muscles, 
rugged outline of body, his greater courage and pug- 
nacity; are all due in chief part to inheritance from his 
half-human male ancestors. These characters would, 
however, have been preserved or even augmented during 
the long ages of man’s savagery, by the success of the 
strongest and boldest men, both in the general struggle 
for life and in their contests for wives ; a success which 
would have ensured their leaving a more numerous 


Chap. XIX. MENTAL POWERS OF MAN AND WOMAN. 857 

progeny than their less favoured brethren. It is not 
probable that the greater strength of man was primarily 
acquired through the inherited effects of his having 
worked harder than woman for his own subsistence 
and that of his family ; for the women in all barbarous 
nations are compelled to work at least as hard as the 
men. With civilised people the arbitrament of battle 
for the possession of the women has long ceased; on 
the other hand, the men, as a general rule, have to work 
harder than the women for their joint subsistence, and 
thus their greater strength will have been kept up. 

Difference in the Mental Powers of the two Sexes . — 
With respect to differences of this nature between man 
and woman, it is probable that sexual selection has 
played a highly important part. I am aware that some 
writers doubt whether there is any such inherent 
difference , but this is at least probable from the 
analogy of the lower animals which present other 
secondary sexual characters. No one disputes that 
the bull differs in disposition from the cow, the wild- 
boar from the sow, the stallion from the mare, and, as 
is well known to the keepers of menageries, the males 
of the larger apes from the females. Woman seems to 
differ from man in mental disposition, chiefly in her 
greater tenderness and less selfishness ; and this holds 
good even with savages, as shewn by a well-known 
passage in Mungo Park’s Travels, and by statements 
made by many other travellers. Woman, owing to her 
maternal instincts, displays these qualities towards 
her infants in an eminent degree ; therefore it is likely 
that she would often extend them towards her fellow- 
creatures. Man is the rival of other men ; he delights 


858 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


in competition, and this leads to ambition v/hich passes 
too easily into selfishness. These latter qualities seem 
to be his natural and unfortunate birthright. It is 
generally admitted that with woman the powers of 
intuition, of rapid perception, and perhaps of imitation, 
are more strongly marked than in man ; but some, 
at least, of these faculties are characteristic of the 
lower races, and therefore of a past and lower state of 
civilisation. 

The chief distinction in the intellectual powers of 
the two sexes is shewn by man’s attaining to a higher 
eminence, in whatever he takes up, than can woman — 
whether requiring deep thought, reason, or imagination, 
or merely the use of the senses and hands. If two lists 
were made of the most eminent men and women in 
poetry, painting, sculpture, music (inclusive both of 
composition and performance), history, science, and 
philosophy, with half-a-dozen names under each subject, 
the two lists would not bear comparison. We may also 
infer, from the law of the deviation from averages, so 
well illustrated by Mr. Galton, in his work on ‘ Here- 
ditary Genius,’ that if men are capable of a decided 
pre-eminence over women in many subjects, the average 
of mental power in man must be above that of woman. 

Amongst the half-human progenitors of man, and 
amongst savages, there have been struggles between 
the males during many generations for the possession 
of the females. But mere bodily strength and size 
would do little for victory, unless associated with 
courage, perseverance, and determined energy. With 
social animals, the young males have to pass through 
many a contest before they win a female, and the older 
males have to retain their females by renewed battles. 


Ohap. xjx. mental powers of man and woman. 859 

They have, also, in the case of mankind, to defend their 
females, as well as their young, from enemies of all 
kinds, and to hunt for their joint subsistence. But to 
avoid enemies or to attack them with success, to capture 
wild animals, and to fashion weapons, requires the 
aid of the higher mental faculties, namely, observa- 
tion, reason, invention, or imagination. These various 
faculties will thus have been continually put to the 
test and selected during manhood ; they will, moreover, 
have been strengthened by use during this same period 
of life. Consequently in accordance with the principle 
often alluded to, we might expect that they would at 
least tend to be transmitted chiefly to the male oJffspring 
at the corresponding period of manhood. 

Now, when two men are put into competition, or a 
. man with a woman, both possessed of every mental 
quality in equal perfection, save that one has higher 
energy, perseverance, and courage, the latter will 
generally become more eminent in every pursuit, and 
will gain the ascendancy. He may be said to possess 
genius — for genius has been declared by a great 
authority to be patience ; and patience, in this sense, 
means unflinching, undaunted perseverance. But this 
view of genius is perhaps deficient ; for without the 
higher powers of the imagination and reason, no 
eminent success can be gained in many subjects. These 
latter faculties, as well as the former, will have been 
developed in man, partly through sexual selection, — 
that is, through the contest of rival males, and partly 

^ J. Stuart Mill remarks “ most plodding, and long liam- 
(‘The Subjection of Women,’ “mering at single thoughts.’’ 
1869, p. 122), “The things in What is this but energy and 
“ which man most excels wo- perseverance ? 

“ man are those which rt'ipiire 


860 


THE DESCENT OP MA.N. 


Part III 


through natural selection, — that is, from success in the 
general struggle for life ; and as in both cases the 
struggle will have been during maturity, the characters 
gained will have been transmitted more fully to the 
male than to the female offspring. It accords in a 
striking manner with this view of the modification and 
re-inforcement cf many of our mental faculties by 
sexual selection, that, firstly, they notoriously undergo 
a considerable change at puberty,^® and, secondly, that 
eunuchs remain throughout life inferior in these same 
qualities. Thus man has ultimately become superior 
to woman. It is, indeed, fortunate that the law of the 
equal transmission of characters to both sexes prevails 
with mammals ; otherwise it is probable that man would 
have become as superior in mental endowment to woman, 
as the peacock is in ornamental plumage to the peahen. 

It must be borne in mind that the tendency in 
- characters acquired by either sex late in life, to be 
transmitted to the same sex at the same age, and of 
early acquired characters to be transmitted to both 
sexes, are rules which, though general, do not always 
hold. If they always held good, we might conclude 
(but I here exceed my proper bounds) that the in- 
herited effects of the early education of boys and girls 
would be transmitted equally to both sexes ; so that 
the present inequality in mental power between the 
sexes would not be effaced by a similar course of early 
training ; nor can it have been caused by their dissimilar 
early training. In order that woman should reach the 
same standard as man, she ought, when nearly adult, to 
be trained to energy and perseverance, and to have her 
reason and imagination exercised to the highest point ; 

* Maudsley, ‘ Mind and Body/ p. 31. 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN— MUSICAL POWERS. 


861 


and then she would probably transmit these qualities 
chiefly to her adult daughters. All women, however, 
could not be thus raised, unless during many genera- 
tions those who excelled in the above robust virtues 
were married, and produced ofl’spring in larger 
numbers than other women. As before remarked of 
bodily strength, although men do not now fight for 
their wives, and this form of selection has passed away, 
yet during manhood, they generally undergo a severe 
struggle in order to maintain themselves and their 
families; and this will tend to keep up or even 
increase their mental powers, and, as a consequence, 
the present inequality between the sexes.^* 


Voice and Musical Powers . — In some species of 
Quadrumana there is a great difference between the 
adult sexes, in the power of their voices and in the 
development of the vocal organs; and man appears 
to have inherited this difference from his early 
progenitors. His vocal cords are about one-third 
longer than in woman, or than in boys ; and emascu- 
lation produces the same effect on him as on the lower 
animals, for it “ arrests that prominent growth of the 
“thyroid, &c., which accompi uies the elongation of 
“ the cords.” With respect to the cause of this 


“ An observation by Vogt 
bears on this subject; he says, 
“It is a remarkable circum- 
“ stance, that the difference 
“ between the sexes, as regards 
“ the cranial cavity, increases 
“with the development of the 
“race, so that the male Euro- 
“pean excels much more the 
“female, than the negro the 


“ ne^ess. Welcker confirms 
“ this statement of Huschke 
“ from his measurements of 
“ negro and German skulls.” 
Cut Vogt admits (‘Lectures on 
Man,’ Eng. translat. 1864, p. 
81) that more observations are 
reoiiisite on this point. 

” Owen, ‘ Anatomy of Verte- 
brates,’ vol. iii. p. 603, 


862 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part III. 


difference between the sexes, I haye nothing to add to 
the remarks in the last chapter on the probable effects 
of the long-continued use of the vocal organs by the 
male under the excitement of love, rage and jealousy. 
According to Sir Duncan Gibb,^® the voice and the 
form of the larynx differ in the different races of 
mankind ; but with the Tartars, Chinese, &c., the 
voice of the male is said not to differ so much from 
that of the female, as in most other races. 

The capacity and love for singing or music, though 
not a sexual character in man, must not here be passed 
over. Although the sounds emitted by animals of all 
kinds serve many purposes, a strong case can be made 
out, that the vocal organs were primarily used and 
perfected in relation to the propagation of the species. 
Insects and some few spiders are the lowest animals 
which voluntarily produce any sound; and this is 
generally effected by the aid of beautifully constructed 
stridulating organs, which are often confined to the 
males. The sounds thus produced consist, I believe 
in all cases, of the same note, repeated rhythmically ; 
and this is sometimes pleasing even to the ears of 
man. The chief and, in some cases, exclusive purpose 
appears to be either to call or charm the opposite 
sex. 

The sounds produced by fishes are said in some 
cases to be made only by the males during the 
breeding-season. All the air-breathing Yertebrata, 
necessarily possess an apparatus for inhaling and 

‘ Journal of the Anthro- Stridulation,’ in ‘ Proc. Boston 
polog. Soc.’ April, 1869, p. Ivii. Soc. of Nat. Hist.’ vol. xi. April, 
and Ixvi. 1868. 

^ Pr, Scudder, ‘ Notes on 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — MUSICAL POWERS. 


863 


expelling air, with a pipe capable of being closed at 
one end. Hence when the primeval members of this 
class were strongly excited and their muscles violently 
contracted, purposeless, sounds would almost certainly 
have been produced ; and these, if they proved in any 
way serviceable, might readily have been modified or 
intensified by the preservation of properly adapted 
variations. The lowest Vertebrates which breathe 
air are Amphibians ; and of these, frogs and toads 
possess vocal organs, which are incessantly used during 
the breeding-season, and which are often more highly 
developed in the male than in the female. The male 
alone of the tortoise utters a noise, and this only 
during the season of love. Male alligators roar or 
bellow during the same season. Every one knows 
how much birds use their vocal organs as a means of 
courtship; and some species likewise perform what 
may be called instrumental music. 

In the class of Mammals, with which we are here 
more particularly concerned, the males of almost all 
the species use their voices during the breeding -season 
much more than at any other time ; and some are 
absolutely mute excepting at this season. With other 
species both sexes, or only the females, use their 
voices as a love- call. Considering these facts, and 
that the vocal organs of some quadrupeds are much 
more largely developed in the male than in the female, 
either permanently or temporarily during the breeding- 
season ; and considering that in most of the lower 
classes the sounds produced by the males, serve not 
only to call but to excite or allure the female, it is 
a surprising fact that we have not as yet any good 
evidence that these organs are used by male mammals 


864 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part TIL 


to charm the females. The American Mycetes caraya 
perhaps forms an exception, as does the Hylobates 
agilis, an ape allied to man. This gibbon has an 
extremely loud hut musical voice. Mr. Waterhouse 
states,^® “It appeared to me that in ascending and 
“ descending the scale, the intervals were always 
' “ exactly half-tones ; and I am sure that the highest 
“ note was the exact octave to the lowest. The quality 
“ of the notes is very musical ; and I do not doubt that 
“ a good violinist would he able to give a correct idea 
“ of the gibbon’s composition, excepting as regards its 
“loudness.” Mr, Waterhouse then gives the notes. 
Professor Owen, who is a musician, confirms the 
foregoing statement, and remarks, though erroneously, 
that this gibbon “alone of brute mammals may be 
“ said to sing.” It appears to be much excited after 
its performance. Unfortunately, its habits have never 
been closely observed in a state of nature ; but from 
the analogy of other animals, it is probable that it 
uses its musical powers more especially during the 
season of courtship. 

This gibbon is not the only species in the genus 
which sings, for my son, Francis Darwin, attentively 
listened in the Zoological Gardens to H, Imciscus 
whilst singing a cadence of three notes, in true 
musical intervals and with a clear musical tone. It 
is a more surprising fact that certain rodents utter 
musical sounds. Singing mice have often been men- 
tioned and exhibited, but imposture has commonly been 
suspected. We have, ho v? ever, at last a clear account 

Given in W. C. L. Martin’s ^ 432 ; Owen, ‘ Anatomy of 
‘ General Introduction to Nat. Vertebrates, vol. iii. p. 600, 

Hist, of Mamm. Animals,’ 1841, 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — MUSICAI. POWERS. 


865 


by a well-known observer, the Kev. S. Lockwood, of 
the musical powers of an American species, the Hes- 
peromys cognatus, belonging to a genus distinct from 
that of the English mouse. This little animal was 
kept in confinement, and the performance was re- 
peatedly heard. In one of the two chief songs, ‘‘ the 
“ last bar would frequently be prolonged to two or 
“ three ; and she would sometimes change from C 
“ sharp and D, to 0 natural and D, then warble on 
“ these two notes awhile, and wind up with a quick 
“ chirp on 0 sharp and D. The distinctness between 
“ the semitones was very marked, and easily appreci- 
“ able to a good ear.” Mr. Lockwood gives both 
songs in musical notation ; and adds that though 
this little mouse “ had no ear for time, yet she would 
“ keep to the key of B (two flats) and strictly in a 
“ major key.” ... “ Her soft clear voice falls an octave 
“ with all the precision possible ; then at the wind 
“ up, it rises again into a very quick trill on 0 sharp 
“ and D.” 

A critic has asked how the ears of man, and he 
ought to have added of other animals, could have been 
adapted by selection so as to distinguish musical notes. 
But this question shows some confusion on the subject; 
a noise is the sensation resulting from the co-existence 
of several aerial “ simple vibrations ” of various periods, 
each of which intermits so frequently that its separate 
existence cannot be perceived. It is only in the want 
of continuity of such vibrations, and in their want of 
harmony inter se, that a noise differs from a musical 
note. Thus an ear to be capable of discriminating 
noises — and the high importance of this power to all 
“ The ‘ American Naturalist,’ 1871, p. 761. 

3 K 


866 


THE DESCENT OF MAN, 


Part IIL 


animals is admitted by every one — must be sensitive to 
musical notes. We have evidence of this ‘ capacity 
even low down in the animal scale : thus Crustaceans 
are provided with auditory hairs of different lengths, 
which have been seen to vibrate when the proper 
musical notes are struck.®^ As stated in a previous 
' chapter, similar observations have been made on the 
hairs of the antennae of gnats. It has been positively 
asserted by good observers that spiders are attracted 
by music. It is also well-known that some dogs howl 
when hearing particular tones.^^ Seals apparently 
appreciate music, and their fondness for it “ was w^ell 
“ known to the ancients, and is often taken advantage 
“ of by the hunters at the present day.” 

Therefore, as far as the mere perception of musical 
notes is concerned, there seems no special difficulty in 
the case of man or of any other animal. Helmholtz 
has explained on physiological principles why concords 
are agreeable, and discords disagreeable to the human 
ear ; but we are little concerned with these, as music 
in harmony is a late invention. We are more con- 
cerned with melody, and here again, according to 
Helmholtz, it is intelligible why the notes of our 
musical scale are used. The ear analyses all sounds 
into their component “ simple vibrations,” although we 
are not conscious of this analysis. In a musical liote 
the lowest in pitch of these is generally j)redominant, 

Helmholtz, ‘ Theorie Pliys. other note. I may add another 
de la Musique,’ 1868, p. 187. instance of a dog always whin- 
^ Several accounts have been ing, when one note on a con- 
published to this effect. Mr. certina, which was out of tune, 
Peach writes to me that he has was played, 
refieatedly found that an old Mr. R. Brown, in ‘ l*roc 

dog of his howls when B flat is Zouh Soc.’ 1868, p. 410. 

Bounded on the flute, and to no 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — MUSICAI; POWlMiS. 


867 


and the others which are less marked are the octave, 
the twelfth, the second octave, &c., all harmonies of 
the fundamental predominant note ; any two notes 
of our scale have many of these harmonic over-tones 
in common. It seems pretty clear then, that if an 
animal always wished to sing precisely the same song, 
he would guide himself Ly sounding those notes in 
succession, which possess many over-tones in common 
— that is, he would choose for his song, notes which 
belong to our musical scale. 

But if it be further asked why musical tones in a 
certain order and rhythm give man and other animals 
pleasure, we can no more give the reason than for the 
pleasantness of certain tastes and smells. That they 
do give pleasure of some kind to animals, we may 
infer from their being ])roduced during the season of 
courtship by many insects, spiders, fishes, amphibians, 
and birds ; for unless the females were able to ap- 
preciate such sounds and were excited or charmed 
by them, the persevering efforts of the males, and 
the complex structures often possessed by them 
alone, would be useless; and this it is impossible 
to believe. 

Human song is generally admitted to be the basis 
or origin of instrumental music. . As neither the 
enjoyment nor the capacity of producing musical 
notes are faculties of the least use to man in reference 
to his daily habits of life, they must be ranked 
amongst the most mysterious with which he is 
endowed. They are present, though in a very rude 
condition, in men of all races, even the most savage; 
but so different is the taste of the several races, that 
our music gives no pleasure to savages, and their 


868 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


music is to us in most cases hideous and unmeaning. 
Dr. Seemann, in some interesting remarks on this 
subject,®^ “ doubts whether even amongst the nations 
“ of Western Europe, intimately connected as they are 
“ by close and frequent intercourse, the music of the 
“ one is interpreted in the same sense by the others 

By travelling eastwards we find that there is cer- 
“ tainly a different language of music. Songs of joy 
“and dance-accompaniments are no longer, as with 
“us, in the major keys, hut always in the minor.” 
Whether or not the half-human progenitors of man 
possessed, like the singing gibbons, the capacity of 
producing, and therefore no doubt of appreciating, 
musical notes, we know that man possessed these 
faculties at a very remote period. M. Lartet has de- 
scribed two flutes made out of the bones and horns of 
the reindeer, found in caves together with flint tools 
and the remains of extinct animals. The arts of 
singing and of dancing are also very ancient, and are 
now practised by all or nearly all the lowest races 
of man. Poetry, which may be considered as the 
oflspring of song, is likewise so ancient, that many 
persons have felt astonished that it should have 
arisen during the earliest ages of which we have any 
record. 

We see that the musical faculties, which are not 
wholly deficient in any race, are capable of prompt 
and high development, for Hottentots and Negroes 
have become excellent musicians, although in their 

‘Journal of Antbropolog. Times,* second edition, 1869, 
Soc.’ Oct. 1870, p. civ. See whicli contain an admirable 
also the several later chapters in account of the habits of savages. 
Sir John Lubbock’s ‘ Prehistoric 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — MUSICAL POWERS. 


869 


native countries they rarely practise anything that we 
should consider music. Schweinfurth, however, was 
pleased with some of the simple melodies which he 
heard in the interior of Africa. But there is nothing 
anomalous in the musical faculties lying dormant in 
man : some species of birds which never naturally 
sing, can without much difficulty be taught to do so ; 
thus a house-sparrow has learnt the song of a linnet. 
As these two species are closely allied, and belong 
to the order of Insessores, which includes nearly all 
the singing-birds in the world, it is possible that a 
progenitor of the sparrow may have been a songster. 
It is more remarkable that parrots, belonging to a 
group distinct from the Insessores, and having differ- 
ently constucted vocal organs, can be taught not only 
to speak, but to pipe or whistle tunes invented by 
man, so that they must have some musical capacity. 
Nevertheless it would be very rash to assume that 
parrots are descended from some ancient form which 
was a songster. Many cases could be advanced of 
organs and instincts originally adapted for one pur- 
pose, having been utilised for some distinct purpose.^® 
Hence the capacity for high musical development 
which the savage races of man possess, may be 


Since this chapter was 
printed, I have seen a valuable 
article by Mr. Chauncey Wright 
(‘ North American Review,’ Oct. 
1870, page 293), who, in dis- 
cussing the above subject, re- 
marks, There are many con- 
“ sequences of the ultimate 
“ laws or uniformities of nature, 
“ through which the acquisition 
“ of one useful pow?r will bring 
“ with it many resulting advan- 


“ tages as well as limiting disad- 
“ vantages, actual or possible, 
“ which the principle of utility 
“may not have comprehended 
“in its action.” As I have 
attempted to shew in an early 
chapter of this work, this prin- 
ciple has an important bearing 
on the acquisition by man oi 
some of his mental character- 
istics. 


870 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


due either to the practice by our semi-human pro- 
genitors of some rude form of music, or simply to 
their having acquired the proper vocal organs for a 
different purpose. But in this latter case we must 
assume, as in the above instance of parrots, and as 
seems to occur with many animals, that they already 
possessed some sense of melody. 

Music arouses in us various emotions, hut not the 
more terrible ones of horror, fear, rage, &c. It awakens 
the gentler feelings of tenderness and love, which 
readily pass into devotion. In the Chinese annals it is 
said, “ Music hath the power of making heaven descend 
“ upon earth.” It likewise stirs up in us the sense 
of triumph and the glorious ardour for war. These 
powerful and mingled feelings may well give rise to 
the sense of sublimity. We can concentrate, as Dr. 
Seemann observes, greater intensity of feeling in a 
single musical note than in pages of writing. It is 
probable that nearly the same emotions, but much 
weaker and far less complex, are felt by birds when 
the male pours forth his full volume of song, in rivalry 
with other males, to captivate the female. Love is 
still the commonest theme of our songs. As Herbert 
Spencer remarks, “ music arouses dormant sentiments 
“ of which we had not conceived the possibility, and do 
“ not know the meaning ; or, as Richter says, tells us of 
“ things we have not seen and shall not see.” Con- 
versely, when vivid emotions are felt and expressed by 
the orator, or even in common speech, musical cadences 
and rhythm are instinctively used. The negro in 
Africa when excited often bursts forth in song ; 
“ another will reply in song, while the company, as if 
“touched by a musical wave, murmur a chorus in 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — IMUSICAL POWERS. 


871 


“ perfect unison.” Even monkeys express strong 
feelings in different tones — anger and impatience by 
low, — fear and pain by high notes.^^ The sensations 
and ideas thus excited in us by music, or expressed by 
the cadences of oratory, appear from their vagueness, 
yet depth, like mental reversions to the emotions and 
thoughts of a long-past age. 

All these facts with respect to music and impassioned 
speech become intelligible to a certain extent, if we 
may assume that musical tones and rhythm were used 
by our half-human ancestors, during the season of court- 
ship, when animals of all kinds are excited not only by 
love, but by the strong passions of jealousy, rivalry, 
and triumph. From the deeply-laid principle of in- 
herited associations, musical tones in this case would 
be likely to call up vaguely and indefinitely the strong 
emotions of a long-past age. As we have every 
reason to suppose that articulate speech is one of 
the latest, as it certainly is the highest, of the arts 
acquired by man, and as the instinctive power of pro- 
ducing musical notes and rhythms is developed low down 
in the animal series, it would be altogether opposed to 
the principle of evolution, if we were to admit that man’s 
musical capacity has been developed from the tones 
used in impassioned speech. We must suppose that 
the rhythms and cadences of oratory are derived from 
previously developed musical powers.^^ We can thus 

Winw 00(1 Rtade, ‘ The Mar- Function of Music,’ by Mr. 
tyrdom of Man,’ 1872, p. 441, Herbert Spencer, in his collected 

and ‘ African Sketch Book,’ ‘ Essays,' 1858, p. 359. Mr. 
1873, vol. ii. p. 313. Spencer comes to an exactly 

“ Hengger, ‘ Siiugethiere von opposite conclusion to that at 
Paraguay,’ s. 49. which I have arrived. He con- 

See the very interesting eludes, as did Dkbrot formerly, 
discussion on the ‘ Origin and that the cadences used in em.o- 


872 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


understand how it is that music, dancing, song, and 
poetry are such very ancient arts. We may go even 
further than this, and, as remarked in a former chapter, 
believe that musical sounds afforded one of the bases 
for the development of language.'^® 

As the males of several quadrumanous animals have 
their vocal organs much more developed than in the 
females, and as a gibbon, one of the anthropomorphous 
apes, pours forth a whole octave of musical notes and 
may he said to sing, it appears probable that the 
progenitors of man, either the males or females or 
both sexes, before acquiring the power of expressing 
their mutual love in articulate language, endeavoured 
to charm each other with musical notes and rhythm. 
So little is known about the use of the voice by the 
Quadrumana during the season of love, that we have 
no means of judging whether the habit of singing 
was first acquired by our male or female ancestors. 
Women are generally thought to possess sweeter voices 
than men, and as far as this serves as any guide, we 


tional speech afford the founda- 
tion from which music has 
been developed; whilst I con- 
clude that musical notes and 
rhythm were first acquired by 
the male or female progenitors 
of mankind for the sake of 
charming the opposite sex. 
Thus musical tones became 
firmly associated with some of 
the strongest passions an animal 
is capable of feeling, and are 
consequently used instinctively, 
or through association when 
strong emotions are expressed in 
speech. Mr. Spencer does not 
qlfer any satisfactory explana- 
tion, nor can I, why high or 


deep notes should be expressive, 
both with man and the lower 
animals, of certain emotions. 
Mr. Spencer gives also an 
interesting discussion on the 
relations between poetry, recita- 
tive and song. 

I find in Lord Monboddo’s 
‘ Origin of Language,’ vol. i. 
(1774), p. 469, that Dr. Black- 
lock likewise thought “ that 
“ the first language among men 
‘ was music, and that before 
“our ideas were expressed by 
“ articulate sounds, they were 
“ communicated by tones varied 
“according to different degrees 
“ of gravity and acuteness.” 


Chap. XIX. MAN— LOVE OF ORNAMENT. 


873 


may infer that they first acquired musical powers in 
order to attract the other sex.'^^ But if so, this must 
have occurred long ago, before our ancestors had be- 
come sufficiently human to treat and value their women 
merely as useful slaves. The impassioned orator, bard, 
or musician, when with his varied tones and cadences 
he excites the strongest emotions in his hearers, little 
suspects that he uses the same means by which his 
half-human ancestors long ago aroused each other’s 
ardent passions, during their courtship and rivalry. 

The Influence of Beauty in determining the Marriages 
of Mankind . — In civilised life man is largely, but by 
no means exclusively, influenced in the choice of his 
wife by external appearance ; but we are chiefly con- 
cerned with primeval times, and our only means of 
forming a judgment on this subject is to study the 
habits of existing semi-civilised and savage nations. 
If it can be shewn that the men of different races 
prefer women having various characteristics, or con- 
versely with the women, we have then to enquire 
whether such choice, continued during many genera- 
tions, would produce any sensible effect on the race, 
either on one sex or both according to the form of 
inheritance which has prevailed. 

It will be well first to shew in some detail that 
savages pay the greatest attention to their personal 
appearance."*^ That they have a passion for ornament is 

See an interesting discus- in all parts of the world orna- 
sion on this subject by Hackel, ment themselves, is given by 
‘ Generelle Morph,’ B. ii. 1866, the Italian traveller. Professor 
s. 246. *Mantegazza, ‘ Rio de la Plata, 

A full and excellent account Viaggi e Studi,’ 1867, pp. 525- 
of the manner in which savages 545 ; all the following state- 


874 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


PaT!T I it. 


notorious ; and an English philosopher goes so far as 
to maintain, that clothes were first made for ornament 
and not for warmth. As Professor Waitz remarks, 
“ however poor and miserable man is, he finds a 
“ pleasure in adorning himself.” The extravagance of 
the naked Indians of South America in decorating them- 
selves is shewn “ by a man of large stature gaining 
“ with difficulty enough by the labour of a fortnight to 
procure in exchange the chica necessary to paint 
“himself red.”"*^ The ancient barbarians of Europe 
during the Keindeer period brought to their caves any 
brilliant or singular objects which they happened to 
find. Savages at the present day everywhere deck 
themselves with plumes, necklaces, armlets, ear-rings, 
&c. They paint themselves in the most diversified 
manner. “ If painted nations,” as Humboldt observes, 
“ had been examined with the same attention as clothed 
“ nations, it would have been perceived that the most 
“ fertile imagination and the most mutable caprice 
“ have created the fashions of painting, as well as 
“ those of garments.” 

In one part of Africa the eyelids are coloured black ; 
in another the nails are coloured yellow or purple. In 
many places the hair is dyed of various tints. In differ- 


meuts, when other references 
are not given, are taken from 
this work. See, also, Waitz, 
‘ Introduction to Anthropolog.’ 
Eng. translat. vol. i. 1863, p. 
275, et passim. Lawrence also 
gives very full details in his 
‘ Lectures on Physiology,’ 1822. 
Since this chapter was written 
Sir J. Lubbock has published his 
‘ Origin of Civilisation,’ 1870, in 
which there is an interesting 


chapter on the present subject, 
and from which (pp. 42, 48) I 
have taken some facts about 
savages dyeing their teeth and 
hair, and piercing their teeth. 

Humboldt, ‘ Personal Nar- 
rative,’ Eng. translat. vol. iv. 
p. 515 ; on the imagination 
shewn in painting the body, 
p. 522; on modifying the form 
of the calf of the leg, p. 466. 


Chap. XTX. 


MAN — T.OVE OF ORNAMENT. 


875 


ent countries the teeth are stained black, red, blue, <^c., 
and in the Malay Archipelago it is thought shameful 
to have white teeth “ like those of a dog.” Not one 
great country can he named, from the Polar regions in 
the north to New Zealand in the south, in which the 
aborigines do not tattoo themselves. This practice was 
followed by - the Jews of old, aud by the ancient 
Britons. In Africa some of the natives tattoo them- 
selves, but it is a much more common practice to raise 
protuberances by rubbing salt into incisions made in 
various parts of the body ; and these are considered by 
the inhabitants of Kordofan and Darfur “ to be great 
personal attractions.” In the Arab countries no 
beauty can be perfect until the cheeks ‘‘or temples 
“ have been gashed.” In South America, as Hum- 
boldt, remarks, “ a mother would be accused of culpable 
“indifference towards her children, if she did not 
“ employ artificial means to shape the calf of the leg 
“after the fashion of the country.” In the Old and 
New Worlds the shape of the skull was formerly 
modified during infancy in the most extraordinary 
manner, as is still the case in many places, and such 
deformities are considered ornamental. For instance, 
the savages of Colombia deem a much flattened head 
“ an essential point of beauty.” 

The hair is treated with especial care in various 
countries ; it is allowed to grow to full length, so as to 
reach to the ground, or is combed into “a compact 
“ frizzled mop, which is the Papuan’s pride and 
“ glory.” In Northern Africa “ a man requires a 

‘ The Nile Tributaries,’ Hist, of Mankind,’ 4th edit. 
1867 ; ‘ The Albert N’yanza,’ vol. i. 1851, p. 321. 

1866, vol. i. p. 218. ^ On the Papuans, Wallace, 

^ (Quoted by Prichard, ‘ Phys. ‘ The Malay Archipelago,’ voL ii. 


876 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part in 


period of from eight to ten years to perfect his 
“ coiiFure.” With other nations the head is shaved, and 
in parts of South America and Africa even the eye- 
brows and eyelashes are eradicated. The natives of 
the Upper Nile knock out the four front teeth, saying 
that they do not wish to resemble brutes. Further 
south, the Batokas knock out only the two upper in- 
cisors, which, as Livingstone‘S^ remarks, gives the face 
a hideous appearance, owing to the prominence of the 
lower jaw ; hut these people think the presence of 
the incisors most unsightly, and on beholding some 
Europeans, cried out, “ Look at the great teeth ! ” The 
chief Sehituani tried in vain to alter this fashion. In 
various parts of Africa and in the Malay Archipelago the 
natives file the incisors into points like those of a saw, or 
pierce them with holes, into which they insert studs. 

As the face with us is chiefly admired for its beauty, 
so with savages it is the chief seat of mutilation. In 
all quarters of the world the septum, and more rarely 
the wings of the nose are pierced ; rings, sticks, 
feathers, and other ornaments being inserted into the 
holes. The ears are everywhere pierced and similarly 
ornamented, and with the Botocudos and Lenguas of 
South America the hole is gradually so much enlarged 
that the lower edge touches the shoulder. In North 
and South America and in Africa either the upper or 
lower lip is pierced ; and with the Botocudos the hole in 
the lower lip is so large that a disc of wood, four inches 
in diameter, is placed in it. Mantegazza gives a curious 
account of the shame felt by a South American native, 
and of the ridicule which he excited, when he sold his 


p. 445. On the coiffure of the Albert N’yanza,’ vol. i. p. 210. 
Africans, Sir S. Baker, ‘The ‘ Travels,’ p. 633, 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — LOVE OF ORNAMENT. 


877 


tembetay — the large coloured piece of wood which is 
passed through the hole. In Central Africa the 
women perforate the lower lip and wear a crystal, 
which, from the movement of the tongue, has “a 
“ wriggling motion, indescribably ludicrous during con- 
“ versation.” The wife of the chief of Latooka told Sir 
S. Baker that Lady Baker “ would be much improved 
“ if she would extract her four front teeth from the 
“ lower jaw, and wear the long pointed polished crystal 
“ in her under lip.” Further south with the Makalolo, 
the upper lip is perforated, and a large metal and bamboo 
ring, called a jpeleU, is .worn in the hole. “ This caused 
“ the lip in one case to project two inches beyond the 
“ tip of the nose ; and when the lady smiled, the con- 
“ traction of the muscles elevated it over the eyes. 
“ ‘ Why do the women wear these things ? * the vener- 
“ able chief. Chins urdi, was asked. Evidently surprised 
“ at such a stupid question, he replied, ‘ For beauty ! 
“ ‘ They are the only beautiful things women have ; 
“ ‘ men have beards, women have none. What kind 
“ ‘ of a person would she be without the pelele ? She 
“ ‘ would not be a woman at all with a mouth like a 
“ ‘ man, but no beard.’ ” 

Hardly any part of the body, which can be un- 
naturally modified, has escaped. The amount of 
suffering thus caused must have been extreme, for 
many of the operations require several years for their 
completion, so that the idea of their necessity must be 
imperative. The motives are various ; the men paint 
their bodies to make themselves appear terrible in 

** * The Albert N’yanza,’ ciation,’ 18G0 ; report given in 
1866, vol. i. p. 217. the ‘ Athenaeum,’ July 7, 1860, 

** Livingstone, ‘British Asso- p. 29. 


878 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


battle ; certain mutilations are connected with religious 
rites, or they mark the age of puberty, or the rank of the 
man, or they serve to distinguish the tribes. Amongst 
savages the same fashions prevail for long periods,®® 
and thus mutilations, from ^whatever cause first made, 
soon come to be valued as distinctive marks. But self- 


adornment, vanity, and the admiration of others, seem 
to be the commonest motives. In regard to tattooing, 
I was told by the missionaries in New Zealand that 
when they tried to persuade some girls to give up the 
practice, they answered, “We must just have a - few 
“ lines on our lips ; else when we grow old we shall be 
“so very ugly.” With the men of New Zealand, a 
most capable judge says, “to have fine tattooed 
“ faces was the great ambition of the young, both to 
“ render themselves attractive to the ladies, and 
“ conspicuous in war.” A star tattooed on the forehead 
and a spot on the chin are thought by the women in 
one part of Africa to be irresistible attractions.®^ 
In most, but not all parts of the world, the men 
are more ornamented than the women, and often in 
a different manner ; sometimes, though rarely, the 
women are hardly at all ornamented. As the women 
are made by savages to perform the greatest share of 
the work, and as they are not allowed to eat the best 
kinds of food, so it accords with the characteristic 
selfishness of man that they should not be allowed to 


^ Sir S. Baker (ibid. vol. i. p. 
210) speaking of the natives of 
Central Africa says, “ every 
“ tribe has a distinct and nn- 
“ changing hishion for dressing 
“ the hair.” See Agassiz 
(‘Journey in Brazil,* 1868, p. 
318) on the invariability of the 


tattooing of the Amazonian 
Indians. 

Rev. R. Taylor, ‘ New 
Zealand and its Inhabitant‘s,’ 
1855, p. 152. 

“ Mantegczza, ‘ Viaggi e 
Studi,’ p. 5-li 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — BEAUTY. 


879 


obtain, or use the finest ornaments. Lastly, it is a 
remarkable fact, as proved by the foregoing quotations, 
that the same fashions in modifying the shape of the 
head, in ornamenting the hair, in painting, tattooing, 
in perforating the nose, lips, or ears, in removing or 
filing the teeth, &c., now prevail, and have long pre- 
vailed, in the most distant quarters of the world. It 
is extremely improbable that these practices, followed 
by so many distinct nations, should be due to tra- 
dition from any common source. They indicate the 
close similarity of the mind of man, to whatever 
race he may belong, just as do the almost universal 
habits of dancing, masquerading, and making rude 
pictures. 

Having made these preliminary remarks on the 
admiration felt by savages for various ornaments, and 
for deformities most unsightly in our eyes, let us see 
how far the men are attracted by the appearance - of 
their women, and what are their ideas of beauty. I 
have heard it maintained that savages are quite in- 
difierent about the beauty of their women, valuing 
them solely as slaves ; it may therefore be well to 
observe that this conclusion does not at all agree with 
the care which the women take in ornamenting them- 
selves, or with their vanity. Burchell gives an 
amusing account of a Bush-woman who used as much 
grease, red ochre, and shining powder “ as would have 
“ ruined any but a very rich husband.’' She displayed 
also “ much vanity and too evident a consciousness of 
“ her superiority.” Mr. Win wood Eeade informs me 
that the negroes of the West Coast often discuss the 
“ ‘ Travels in 8. Africa,’ 1824, vol. i. p. 414. 


880 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Paut III 


beauty of their women. Some competent observers 
have attributed the fearfully common practice of in- 
fanticide partly to the desire felt by the women to 
retain their good looks.^^ In several regions the 
women wear charms and use love philters to gain the 
affections of the men; and Mr. Brown enumerates 
four plants used for this purpose by the women of 
North-Western America.®® 


Hearne,®® an excellent observer, who lived many 
years with the American Indians, says, in speaking of 
the women, “Ask a Northern Indian what is beauty, 
“ and he will answer, a broad flat face, small eyes, high 
“cheek-bones, three or four broad black lines across 
“each cheek, a low forehead, a large broad chin, a 
“ clumsy hook nose, a tawny hide, and breasts hanging 
“ down to the belt.” Pallas, who visited the northern 
parts of the Chinese empire, says, “ those women are 
“ preferred who have the Mandschii form ; that is to 
“ say, a broad face, high cheek-bones, very broad noses, 
“and enormous ears;”®’ and Yogt remarks that the 
obliquity of the eye, which is proper to the Chinese 
and Japanese, is exaggerated in their pictures for the 
purpose, as it “ seems, of exhibiting its beauty, as 
“ contrasted with the eye of the red-haired barbarians.” 
It is well known, as Hue repeatedly remarks, that the 
Chinese of the interior think Europeans hideous, with 


See, for references, Gerlaud 
‘ Ueber das Aussterben der Na- 
turvolker,’ 1868, ss. 51, 53, 55 ; 
also Azara, ‘Voyages,’ &c. tom. 
ii. p. 116. 

“ On the vegetable produc- 
tions used by the North-Western 
American Indians, ‘ Pharmaceu- 
tical Journal,’ vol. x. 

** ‘ A Journey from Prince of 


Wales Fort,’ 8vo. edit, 1796, 
p. 89. 

Quoted by Prichard, ‘ Phys. 
Hist, of Mankind,’ 3rd edit. vol. 
iv. 1844, p. 519; Vogt, ‘Lec- 
tures 6n Man,* Eng. translat. p. 
129. On the opinion of the 
Chinese on the Cingalese, E. 
Tennent, ‘ Ceylon,’ 1859, vol. ii. 
p. 107. 


CnAP. XIX. 


MAN— BEAUTY. 


881 


their white skins and prominent noses. The nose is 
far from being too prominent, according to our ideas, 
in the natives of Ceylon ; yet “ the Chinese in the 
“seventh century, accustomed to the flat features of 
“ the Mongol races, were surprised at the prominent 
“ noses of the Cingalese ; and Thsang described them 
“as having ‘the beak of a bird, with the body of a 
“ ‘ man.’ ” 

Finlayson, after minutely describing the people of 
Cochin China, says that their rounded heads and faces 
are their chief characteristics ; and, he adds, “ the 
“ roundness of the whole countenance is more striking 
“ in the women, who are reckoned beautiful in propor- 
“ tion as they display this form of face.” The Siamese 
have small noses with divergent nostrils, a wide mouth, 
rather thick lips, a remarkably large face, with very 
high and broad cheek-bones. It is, therefore, not 
wonderful that “ beauty, according to our notion, is a 
“ stranger to them. Yet they consider their own 
“ females to be much more beautiful than those of 
“ Europe.” 

It is well known that with many Hottentot women 
the posterior part of the body projects in a wonderful 
manner ; they are steatopygous ; and Sir Andrew 
Smith is certain that this peculiarity is greatly 
admired by the men.®® He once saw a woman who 
was considered a beauty, and she was so immensely 
developed behind, that when seated on level ground 

“ Prichard, as taken from tabulam foemin£e, quod nobis 
Crawfurd and Finlayson, ‘ Phys. teterrimum est, quondam per- 

Hist. of Mankind,’ vol. iv. pp. magno sestimari ab hominibus in 

634, 535. hac gente. Nunc res mutata 

Idem illustrissimus viator est, et censent talem conforma- 
diKit mihi prajcinctorium vel tionem minime optandam esse. 

3 L 


882 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


she could not rise, and had to push herself along until 
she came to a slope. Some of the women in various 
negro tribes have the same peculiarity ; and, according 
to Burton, the Somal men ‘‘are said to choose their 
“ wives by ranging them in a line, and by picking her 
“ out who projects farthest a tergo. Nothing can be 
“ more hateful to a negro than the opposite form.” 

With respect to colour, the negroes rallied Mungo 
Park on the whiteness of his skin and the prominence 
of his nose, both of which they considered as “ unsightly 
“ and unnatural conformations.” He in return praised 
the glossy jet of their skins and the lovely depression 
of their noses ; this they said was “ honeymouth,” 
nevertheless they gave him food. The African Moors, 
also, “ knitted their brows and seemed to shudder ” at 
the whiteness of his skin. On the eastern coast, the 
negro boys when they saw Burton, cried out “ Look at 
“ the white man ; does he not look like a white ape ? ” 
On the western coast, as Mr. Winwood Keade informs 
me, the negroes admire a very black skin more than 
one of a lighter tint. But their horror of whiteness 
may be attributed, according to this same traveller, 
partly to the belief held by most negroes that demons 
and spirits are white, and partly to their thinking it a 
sign of ill-health. 

The Banyai of the more southern part of the 
continent are negroes, but “a great many of them 
“are of a light coffee-and-milk colour, and, indeed, 
“ this colour is considered handsome throughout the 
whole country ; ” so that here we have a different 
standard of taste. With the Kafirs, who differ much 

‘ The Anthropological Ke- Waitz, ‘ Introduct. to Anthropo- 
view,’ November, 1864, p. 237. logy,’ Eng. translat. 1863, vol. i. 
For additional references, see p. 105, 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN— BEAUTY. 


883 


from negroes, “ the skin, except among the tribes near 
“Delagoa Bay, is not usually black, the prevailing 
“ colour being a mixture of black and red, the most 
“ common shade being chocolate. Dark complexions, 
‘‘as being most common, are naturally held in the 
“ highest esteem. To be told that he is light-coloured, 
“ or like a white man, would be deemed a very poor 
“compliment by a Kafir. I have heard of one un- 
“ fortunate man who was so very fair that no girl 
“ would marry him.” One of the titles of the Zulu 
king is, “ You who are black.” Mr. Gallon, in 
speaking to me about the natives of S. Africa, remarked 
that their ideas of beauty seem very different from 
ours ; for in one tribe two slim, slight, and pretty girls 
were not admired by the natives. 

Turning to other quarters of the world ; in Java, a 
yellow, not a white girl, is considered, according to 
Madame Pfeiffer, a beauty. A man of Cochin China 
“spoke with contempt of the wife of the English 
“ Ambassador, that she had white teeth like a dog, and 
“ a rosy colour like that of potato-flowers.” We have 
seen that the Chinese dislike our white skin, and that 
the N. Americans admire “a tawny hide.” In S. 
America, the Yuracaras, who inhabit the wooded, damp 
slopes of the eastern Cordillera, are remarkably pale- 
coloured, as their name in their own language ex- 
presses ; nevertheless they consider European women 
as very inferior to their own.®^ 

Mud go Park’s ‘Travels in Rev. J. Schooter, ‘ The Kafirs of 
Africa,’ 4to. 1816, pp. 53, 131. Natal and the Zulu Country,’ 
Burton’s statement is quoted by 1857, p. 1. 

Schaaff hausen, ‘ Archiv. fiir An- For the Javans and Cocbin- 

thropolog.’ 1866, s. 163. On Chinese, see Waitz, ‘ Introduct. 
the Banyai, Livingstone, ‘ Tra- to Anthropology,’ Eng. translat. 
vels,’ p. 64. On the Kafirs, the vol. i. p. 305. On the Yura- 


884 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


p>BT in 


In several of the tribes of North America the hair on 
the head grows to a wonderful length ; and Catlin 
gives a curious proof how much this is esteemed, for 
the chief of the Crows was elected to this office from 
having the longest hair of any man in the tribe, 
namely ten feet and seven inches. The Aymaras and 
' Quichuas of S. America, likewise have very long hair ; 
and this, as Mr. D. Forbes informs me, is so much 
valued as a beauty, that cutting it off was the severest 
punishment which he could inflict on them. In both 
the Northern and Southern halves of the continent the 
natives sometimes increase the apparent length of their 
hair by weaving into it fibrous substances. Although 
the hair on the head is thus cherished, that on the face 
is considered by the North American Indians “ as very 
“ vulgar,” and every hair is carefully eradicated. This 
practice prevails throughout the American continent 
from Yancouver’s Island in the north to Tierra del 
Fuego in the south. When York Minster, a Fuegian 
on board the ^ Beagle,’ was taken back to his country, 
the natives told him he ought to pull out the few 
short hairs on his face. They also threatened a young 
missionary, who was left for a time with them, to strip 
him naked, and pluck the hairs from his face and body, 
yet he was far from being a hairy man. This fashion 
is carried so far that the Indians of Paraguay eradicate 
their eyebrows and eyelashes, saying that they do not 
wish to be like horses.®^ 

caras, A. d’Orbigny, as quoted iu the natives of Vancouver’s 
Prichard, ‘ Phys. Hist, of Man- Island, see Spi’oat, ‘ Scenes and 
kind,’ vol. v. 3rd edit. p. 476. Studies of Savage Life,’ 1868, p. 

‘North American Indians,’ 25. On the Indians of Para- 

by G. Catlin, 3rd edit. 1842, guay, Azara, ‘ Voyages,’ tom. ii. 
vol. i. p. 49 ; vol! ii, p. 227. On p. X05. 


XIX. 


MAN — BEAUTY. 


885 


It is remarkable that throughout the world the races 
which are almost completely destitute of a beard dislike 
hairs on the face and body, and take pains to eradicate 
them. The Kalmucks are beardless, and they are well 
known, like the Americaus, to pluck out all straggling 
hairs ; and so it is with the Polynesians, some of the 
Malays, and the Siamese. Mr. Veitch states that the 
Japanese ladies “all objected to our whiskers, considering 
“ them very ugly, and told us to cut them off, and be 
“ like Japanese men.” The New Zealanders have short, 
curled beards ; yet they formerly plucked out the hairs 
on the face. They had a saying that “ there is no 
“ woman for a hairy man ; ” but it would appear that 
the fashion has changed in New Zealand, perhaps owing 
to the presence of Europeans, and I am assured that 
beards are now admired by the Maories. 

On the other hand, bearded races admire and greatly 
value their beards; among the Anglo-Saxons every 
part of the body had a recognised value ; “ the loss of 
“ the beard being estimated at twenty shillings, while 
the breaking of a thigh was fixed at only twelve.” 
In the East men swear solemnly by their- beards. 
We have seen that Chinsurdi, the chief of the Makalolo 
in Africa, thought that beards were a great ornament. 
In the Pacific the Fijian’s beard is “profuse and bushy, 
“ and is his greatest pride ; ” wliilst the inhabitants of 
the adjacent archipelagoes of Tonga and Samoa are 
“beardless, and abhor a rough chin.” In one island 

Oil the Siamese, rrichaixl, 52G. For the other nations 

ihiil. vol. iv. p. 533. On the meutioned, see references in 

•Ifipanese, Veitch in ‘ Gardeners’ Lawrence, ‘Lectures on Physi- 
Chronicle,’ 18G0, ]). 1104. On ology,’ &c. 1822, p. 272. 
the New Zealaiideis, Mantc- Lubbock, ‘ Origin of Civb 

gazza, ‘ Viaggi e Studi,’ 1807, p. lisation,’ 1870, p. 321. 


886 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part ITL 


alone of the Ellice group “ the men are heavily bearded, 
“ and not a little proud thereof.” 

We thus see how widely the different races of man 
differ in their taste for the beautiful. In every nation 
sufficiently advanced to have made effigies of their gods 
or of their deified rulers, the sculptors no doubt have 
endeavoured to express their highest ideal of beauty 
and grandeur.®^ Under this point of view it is well to 
compare in our mind the Jupiter or Apollo of the Greeks 
with the Egyptian or Assyrian statues ; and these with 
the hideous bas-reliefs on the ruined buildings of 
Central America. 

I have met with very few statements opposed to this 
conclusion. Mr. Winwood Eeade, however, who has 
had ample opportunities for observation, not only with 
the negroes of the West Coast of Africa, but with those 
of the interior who have never associated with Euro- 
peans, is convinced that their ideas of beauty are on the 
whole the same as ours ; and Dr. Kohlfs writes to me 
to the same effect with respect to Bornu and the 
countries inhabited by the Pullo tribes. Mr. Keade 
found that he agreed with the negroes in their estima- 
tion of the beauty of the native girls ; and that their 
appreciation of the beauty of European women corre- 
sponded with ours. They admire long hair, and use 
artificial means to make it appear abundant; they 
admire also a beard, though themselves very scantily 
provided. Mr. Eeade feels doubtful what kind of nose 
is most appreciated ; a girl has been heard to say, “ I 

Dr. Barnard Davis quotes pp. 185, 191. 

Mr. Prichard and others for Ch. Comte has remarks to 

these facts in regard to the this effect in his ‘Traite' de 
Polynesians, in ‘ Anthro^jolo- Legislation,’ 3rd edit. 1837, p. 
gical Review,’ April, 1870, 136. 


Ohap. XIX. 


MAN — BEAtJTV. 


887 


“ do not want to marry him, he has got no nose ; ” and 
this shows that a very flat nose is not admired. We 
should, however, hear in mind that the depressed, broad 
noses and projecting jaws of the negroes of the West 
Coast are exceptional types with the inhabitants of 
Africa. Notwithstanding the foregoing statements, 
Mr. Eeade admits that negroes “ do not like the colour 
‘‘ of our skin ; they look on blue eyes with aversion, 
“ and they think our noses too long and our lips too 
“ thin.” He does not think it probable that negroes 
would ever prefer the most beautiful European woman, 
on the mere grounds of physical admiration, to a good- 
looking negress.®® 

The general truth of the principle, long ago insisted 
on by Humboldt,®® that man admires and often tries to 
exaggerate whatever characters nature may have given 
him, is shown in many ways. The practice of beard- 
less races extirpating every trace of a beard, and often 
all the hairs on the body, affords one illustration. The 
skull has been greatly modified during ancient and 
modern times by many nations ; and there can be little 
doubt that this has been practised, especially in N. and 
S. America, in order to exaggerate some natural and 


The ‘ African Sketch Book,’ 
vol. ii. 1873, pp. 253, 394, 521. 
The Fuegians, as I have been in- 
formed by a missionary .who 
long resided with tliem, consider 
European women as extremely 
l)eautiful ; but from what we 
have seen of the judgment of 
the other aborigines of America, 
I cannot but think that this 
must be a mistake, unless indeed 
the statement refers to tlie few 
Fuegians who have lived for 
some time with Europeans, and 


who must consider us as superior 
beings. I should add that a 
most experienced observer, Capt. 
Burton, believes that a woman 
whom we consider beautiful is 
admired throughout the world, 
* An thropological Re vie w,’ March, 
1864, p. 245. 

‘ Personal Narrative,’ Eng. 
translat. vol. iv. p. 518, and 
elsewhere. Mantegazza, in his 
‘ Viaggi e Studi,’ strongly insists 
on this same principle. 


888 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


pakt in 


admired peculiarity. Many American Indians are 
known to admire a head so extremely flattened as to 
appear to us idiotic. The natives on the north-western 
coast compress the head into a pointed cone ; and it is 
their constant practice to gather the hair into a knot 
on the top of the head, for the sake, as Dr. Wilson 
remarks, “ of increasing the apparent elevation of the 
“ favourite conoid form.” The inhabitants of Arakhan 
“admire a broad, smooth forehead, and in order to 
“ produce it, they fasten a plate of lead on the heads 
“ of the new-born children.” On the other hand, “ a 
“ broad, well-rounded occiput is considered a great 
“beauty ” by the natives of the Fiji islands.’® 

As with the skull, so with the nose; the ancient 
Huns during the age of Attila were accustomed to 
flatten the noses of their infants with bandages, “for 
“ the sake of exaggerating a natural conformation.” 
With the Tahitians, to be called long-nose is considered 
as an insult, and they compress the noses and foreheads 
of their children for the sake of beauty. The same 
holds with the Malays of Sumatra, the Hottentots, 
certain Negroes, and the natives of Brazil.’^ The 
Chinese have by nature unusually small feet ; and it 


On the skulls of the 
American tribes, see Nott and 
Gliddon, ‘Types ot Mankind,’ 
1854, p. 440; Prichard, ‘ Phys. 
Hist, of Mankind,’ vol. i. 3rd 
edit. p. 321 ; on the natives of 
Arakhan, ibid. vol. iv. p. 537. 
Wilson, ‘ Physical Ethnology,’ 
Smithsonian Institution, 1863, 
p. 288 ; on the Fijians, ]i. 290. 
Sir J. Lubbock (‘ Prehistoric 
Times,’ 2nd edit. 1869, p. 506) 
gives an excellent resume on 
this subject. 


On the Huns, Go Iron, ‘ De 
I’Espece,’ tom. ii. 1859, p. 300. 
On the Tahitians, Waitz, ‘An- 
thropolog.’ Eng. translat. vol. i. 
p. 305. Marsden, quoted by 
Prichard, ‘ Phys. Hist, of Man- 
kind,’ 3rd edit. vol. v. p. 67. 
Lawrence, ‘ Lectures on Fhysi- 
ology,’ p. 337. 

This fact was ascertained 
in the ‘ Peise der Novara : 
Anthropolog. Thiel,’ Dr. Weis- 
bach, 1867, s. 265. 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — BEAUTY. 


889 


is well-known that the women of the upper classes 
distort their feet to make them still smaller. Lastly, 
Humboldt thinks that the American Indians prefer 
colouring their bodies with red paint in order to exag- 
gerate their natural tint ; and until recently European 
women added to their naturally bright colours by 
rouge and white cosmetics ; but it may be doubted 
whether barbarous nations have generally had any 
such intention in painting themselves. 

In the fashions of our own dress we see exactly the 
same principle and the same desire to carry every point 
to an extreme ; we exhibit, also, the same spirit of 
emulation. But the fashions of savages are far more 
permanent than ours ; and whenever their bodies are 
artificially modified, this is necessarily the case. The 
Arab women of the Upper Nile occupy about three 
days in dressing their hair ; they never imitate other 
tribes, “ but simply vie with each other in the super- 
“ lativeness of their own style.” Dr. Wilson, in 
speaking of the compressed skulls of various American 
races, adds, “such usages are among the least eradi- 
“ cable, and long survive the shock of revolutions that 
“ change dynasties and efface more important national 
“ peculiarities.” The same principle comes into play 
in the art of breeding ; and we can thus understand, 
as I have elsewhere explained, the wonderful develop- 
ment of the many races of animals and plants, which 
have been kept merely for ornament. Fanciers always 
wish each character to be somewhat increased ; they 
do not admire a medium standard ; they certainly do 

‘ bmitlisoiiian Institution,’ ‘ 'J'hc Variation of Animals 

1803, p. 289. On tlie fashions of and I'lants under Tlomestica- 
A rab women, Sir S. Baker, *Tho tion,’ vol. i. p. 214; vol. ii. p. 
Nile Tributarieg,’ 1807, p. 121. 240. 


890 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III 


not desire any great and abrupt change in the 

character of their breeds ; they admire solely what 
they are accustomed to, but they ardently desire to 
see each characteristic feature a little more developed. 

The senses of man and of the lower animals seem to 
be so constituted that brilliant colours and certain 
forms, as well as harmonious and rhythmical sounds, 
give pleasure and are called beautiful; but why this 

should be so we know not. It is certainly not true 

that there is in the mind of man any universal 

standard of beauty with respect to the human body. It 
is, however, possible that certain tastes may in the 
course of time become inherited, though there is no 
evidence in favour of this belief ; and if so, each race 
would possess its owm innate ideal standard of beauty. 
It has been argued that ugliness consists in an 
approach to the structure of the lower animals, and no 
doubt this is partly true with the more civilised nations, 
in which intellect is highly appreciated ; but this 
explanation will hardly apply to all forms of ugliness. 
The men of each race prefer what they are accustomed 
to ; they cannot endure any great change ; but they 
like variety, and admire each characteristic carried to 
a moderate extreme.’® Men accustomed to a nearly 
oval face, to straight and regular features, and to 
bright colours, admire, as we Europeans know, these 
points when strongly developed. On the other hand, 
men accustomed to a broad face, with high cheek-bones, 
a depressed nose, and a black skin, admire these pecu- 

Schaaffhausen, ‘ Archiv. dozen more or less different 
fiir Anthropologie,’ 1866, s. 164. theories of the idea of beauty ; 

Mr. Bain has collected but none are quite the same as 
(‘ Mental and Moral Science,’ that here given. 

1868. pp. 304-314) about a 


Chap. XIX. 


MAN — BEAUTY. 


891 


liarities wlien strongly marked. No doubt characters 
of all kinds may be too much developed for beauty. 
Hence a perfect beauty, which implies many characters 
modified in a particular manner, will be in every race 
a prodigy. As the great anatomist Bichat long ago 
said, if every one were cast in the same mould, there 
would be no such thing as beauty. If all our women 
were to become as beautiful as the Venus de’ Medici, 
we should for a time be charmed ; but we should soon 
wish for variety ; and as soon as we had obtained 
variety, we should wish to see certain characters a 
little exaggerated beyond the then existing common 
standard. 


892 


THE DESCENT OE MAN. 


PAitT m 


CHAPTEK XX. 

Secondary Sexual Characters of Man — coniinued . 

On the effects of the continued selection of women according to a 
different standard of beauty in each race— On the causes which 
interfere with sexual selection in civilised and savage nations — 
Conditions favourable to sexual selection during primeval times 
— On the manner of action of sexual selection with mankind — 
On the women in savage tribes having some power to choose 
their husbands — Absence of hair on the body, and development 
of the beard — Colour of the shin — Summary. 

We have seen in the last chapter that with all 
barbarous races ornaments, dress, and external appear- 
ance are highly valued ; and that the men judge of the 
beauty of their women by widely different standards. 
We must next inquire whether this preference and the 
consequent selection during many generations of those 
women, which appear to the men of each race the most 
attractive, has altered the character either of the 
females alone, or of both sexes. With mammals the 
general rule appears to be that characters of all kinds 
are inherited equally by the males and females ; we 
might therefore expect that with mankind any charac- 
ters gained by the females or by the males through 
sexual selection would commonly be transferred to the 
offspring of both sexes. If any change has thus been 
effected, it is almost certain that the different races 


Chap. XX. 


MAN— SEXUAL SELECTION. 


893 


would be differently modified, as each has its own 
standard of beauty. 

With mankind, especially with savages, many causes 
interfere with the action of sexual selection as far as 
the bodily frame is concerned. Civilised men are 
largely attracted by the mental charms of women, by 
their wealth, and especially by their social position ; 
for men rarely marry into a much lower rank. The 
men who succeed in obtaining the more beautiful 
women will not have a better chance of leaving a long 
line of descendants than other men with plainer wives, 
save the few who bequeath their fortunes according to 
primogeniture. With respect to the opposite form of 
selection, namely, of the more attractive men by the 
women, although in civilised nations women have free 
or almost free choice, 'which is not the case with 
barbarous races, yet their choice is largely influenced 
by the social position and wealth of the men ; and the 
success of the latter in life depends much on their 
intellectual powers and energy, or on the fruits of 
these same powers in their forefathers. No excuse is 
needed for treating this subject in some detail ; for, as 
the German philosopher Schopenhauer remarks, “ the 
“ final aim of all love intrigues, be they comic or 
‘‘ tragic, is really of more importance than all other 
“ ends in human life. What it all turns upon is 
“ nothing less than the composition of the next gene- 
“ ration. ... It is not the weal or woe of any one 
‘‘ individual, but that of the human race to come, which 
“ is here at stake.” ^ 

There is, however, reason to believe that in certain 

^ ‘ Schopenhauer and Darwinism,’ in ‘Journal of Anthropology, 
Jan. 1871, p. 323. 


894 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part HI. 


civilised and semi-civilised nations sexual selection has 
effected something in modifying the bodily frame of 
some of the members. Many persons are convinced, 
as it appears to me with justice, that our aristocracy, 
including under this term all wealthy families in 
which primogeniture has long prevailed, from having 
chosen during many generations from all classes the 
more beautiful women as their wives, have become 
handsomer, according to the European standard, than 
the middle classes ; yet the middle classes are placed 
under equally favourable conditions of life for the 
perfect development of the body. Cook remarks that 
the superiority in personal appearance ‘‘ which is ob- 
“ servable in the erees or nobles in all the other islands 
“(of the Pacific) is found in the Sandwich Islands;” 
but this may be chiefly due to their better food and 
manner of life. 

The old traveller Chardin, in describing the Persians, 
says their “ blood is now highly refined by frequent 
“intermixtures with the Georgians and Circassians, 
“ two nations which surpass all the world in personal 
“beauty. There is hardly a man of rank in Persia 
“ who is not born of a Georgian or Circassian mother.” 
He adds that they inherit their beauty, “not from 
“ their ancestors, for without the above mixture, the 
“men of rank in Persia, who are descendants of the 
“ Tartars, would be extremely ugly.” ^ Here is a more 
curious case ; the priestesses who attended the temple 
of Venus Erycina at San-Giuliano in Sicily, were 
selected for their beauty out of the whole of Greece ; 

^ These quotations are taken upper classes in England to the 
from Lawrence (‘Lectures on men having long selected the 
Physiology,’ &c. 1822, p. 393), more beautiful women, 
who attributes the beauty of the 


Chap. XX. MAN — CHECKS TO SEXUAL SELECTION. 895 

they were not vestal virgins, and Quatrefages,^ who 
states the foregoing fact, says that the women of San- 
Ginliano are now famous as the most beautiful in the 
island, and are sought by artists as models. But it is 
obvious that the evidence in all the above cases is 
doubtful. 

The following case, though relating to savages, is 
well worth giving from its curiosity. Mr. Winwood 
Eeade informs me that the Jollofs, a tribe of negroes on 
the west coast of Africa, “ are remarkable for their 
“ uniformly fine appearance.” A friend of his asked 
one of these men, “ How is it that every one whom I 
“ meet is so fine looking, not only your men, but your 
“ women ? ” The Jollof answered, ‘‘ It is very easily 
“ explained : it has always been our custom to pick out 
“ our worst-looking slaves and to sell them.” It need 
hardly be added that with all savages, female slaves 
serve as concubines. That this negro should have 
attributed, whether rightly or wrongly, the fine 
appearance of his tribe to the long- continued elimina- 
tion of the ugly women is not so surprising as it may at 
first appear ; for I have elsewhere shewn ^ that negroes 
fully appreciate the importance of selection in the 
breeding of their domestic animals, and I could give 
from Mr. Eeade additional evidence on this head. 

The Causes which 'prevent or check the Action of Sexual 
Selection with Savages. — The chief causes are, first, so- 
called communal marriages or promiscuous inter- 
course ; secondly, the consequences of female infanti- 

‘ Authropologie,’ ‘ Revue des * ‘The Variation of Animals 
Coins Scientifiques,’ Oct. 1868, and Plants under Domestica- 
p. 721. tion,* vol. i. p. 207. 


896 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part HI. 


cide ; thirdly, early betrothals ; and lastly, the low 
estimation in which women are held, as mere slaves. 
These four points must be considered in some detail. 

It is obvious that as long as the pairing of man, or 
of any other animal, is left to mere chance, with no 
choice exerted by either sex, there can be no sexual 
selection; and no effect will be produced on the 
offspring by certain individuals having had an advan- 
tage over others in their courtship. Now it is asserted 
that there exist at the present day tribes which 
practise what Sir J. Lubbock by courtesy calls com- 
munal marriages ; that is, all the men and women in 
the tribe are husbands and wives to one another. The 
licentiousness of many savages is no doubt astonishing, 
but it seems to me that more evidence is requisite, 
before we fully admit that their intercourse is in any case 
promiscuous. Nevertheless all those who have most 
closely studied the subject,® and whose judgment is 
worth much more than mine, believe that communal 
marriage (this expression being variously guarded) was 
the original and universal form throughout the world, 
including therein the intermarriage of brothers and 
sisters. The late Sir A. Smith, who had travelled 


Sir J. Lubbock, ‘ The Origin 
of Civilisation,’ 1870, chap. hi. 
especially pp. 60-67. Mr. 
McLennan, in his extremely 
valuable work on ‘ Primitive 
Marriage,* 1865, p. 163, speaks 
of the union of the sexes “ in 
“ the earliest times as loose, 
“ transitory, and in some degree 
“promiscuous.” Mr. M‘Lennan 
and Sir J. Lubbock have col- 
lected much evidence on the 
extreme licentiousness of savages 
at the present time. Mr. L. II. 


Moi gau, in his interesting 
memoir on the classificatory 
system of relationship (‘ IToc. 
American Acad, of Sciences,’ vol. 
vii. Feb. 1868, p. 475), con- 
cludes that polygam}^ and all 
forms of marriage during prime- 
val times were essentially un- 
known. It appears also, from 
Sir J. Lubbock’s work, that 
Bachofen likewise believes that 
communal intercourse originally 
prevailed. 


Chap. XX. MAN — CHECKS TO SEXUAL SELECTION. 897 

widely in S. Africa, and knew much about the habits 
of savages there and elsewhere, expressed to me the 
strongest opinion that no race exists in which woman 
is considered as the property of the community. I 
believe that his judgment was largely determined by 
what is implied by the term marriage. Throughout 
the following discussion I use the term in the same 
sense as when naturalists speak of animals as mono- 
gamous, meaning thereby that the male is accepted by 
or chooses a single female, and lives wjth her either 
during the breeding-season or for the whole year, 
keeping possession of her by the law of might ; or, as 
when they speak of a polygamous species, meaning 
that the male lives with several females. This kind of 
marriage is all that concerns us here, as it suffices for 
the work of sexual selection. But I know that some 
of the writers above referred to imply by the term 
marriage a recognised right protected by the tribe. 

The indirect evidence in favour of the belief of the 
former prevalence of communal marriages is strong, 
and rests chiefly on the terms of relationship which are 
employed between the members of the same tribe, 
implying a connection with the tribe, and not with 
either parent. But the subject is too large and 
complex for even an abstract to be here given, and I 
will conflne myself to a few remarks. It is evident in 
the case of such marriages, or where the marriage tie 
is very loose, that the relationship of the child to its 
father cannot be known. But it seems almost incredi- 
ble that the relationship of the child to its mother 
should ever be completely ignored, especially as the 
women in most savage tribes nurse their infants for a 
long time. Accordingly, in many cases the lines of 

3 M 


898 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III, 


descent are traced through the mother alone, to the 
exclusion of the father. But in other cases the terms 
employed express a connection with the tribe alone, to 
the exclusion even of the mother. It seems possible 
that the connection between the related members of 
the same barbarous tribe, exposed to all sorts of danger, 
'might be so much more important, owing to the need 
of mutual protection and aid, than that between the 
mother and her child, as to lead to the sole use of terms 
expressive of the former relationships ; but Mr. Morgan 
is convinced tKat this view is by no means sufficient. 

The terms of relationship used in different parts of 
the world may be divided, according to the author just 
quoted, into two great classes, the classificatory and 
descriptive, — the latter being employed by us. It is 
the classificatory system which so strongly leads to the 
belief that communal and other extremely loose forms 
of marriage were originally universal. But as far as I 
can see, there is no necessity on this ground for 
believing in absolutely promiscuous intercourse ; and I 
am glad to find that this is Sir J. Lubbock’s view. 
Men and women, like many of the lower animals, 
might formerly have entered into strict though 
temporary unions for each birth, and in this case 
nearly as much confusion would have arisen in the 
terms of relationship as in the case of promiscuous 
intercourse. As far as sexual selection is concerned, 
all that is required is that choice should be exerted 
before the parents unite, and it signifies little whether 
the unions last for life or only for a season. 

Besides the evidence derived from the terms of 
relationship, other lines of reasoning indicate the 
foriqpr wide prevalence of communal marriage. Sir J. 


Chap. XX. MAN — CHECKS TO SEXUAL SELECTION. 899 

Lubbock accounts ® for the strange and widely- 
extended habit of exogamy — that is, the men of one 
tribe taking wives from a distinct tribe, — by com- 
munism having been the original form of intercourse ; 
so that a man never obtained a wife for himself unless 
he captured her from a neighbouring and hostile tribe, 
and then she would naturally have become his sole and 
valuable property. Thus the practice of capturing 
wives might have arisen; and from the honour so 
gained it might ultimately have become the universal 
habit. According to Sir. J. Lubbock,® we can also 
thus understand “ the necessity of expiation for 
“ marriage as an infringement of tribal rites, since, 
“ according to old ideas, a man had no right to appro- 
“ priate to himself that which belonged to the whole 
“ tribe.” Sir J. Lubbock further gives a curious body 
of facts shewing that in old times high honour was 
bestowed on women who were utterly licentious ; and 
this, as he explains, is intelligible, if we admit that 
promiscuous intercourse was the aboriginal, and there- 
fore long revered custom of the tribe."^ 

Although the manner of development of the 
marriage- tie is an obscure subject, as we may infer 
from the divergent opinions on several points between 
the three authors who have studied it most closely, 
namely, Mr. Morgan, Mr. M‘Lennan, and Sir J. 
Lubbock, yet from the foregoing and several other 
lines of evidence it seems probable ® that the habit of 

® ‘ Address to British Associa- found copious evidence on re- 
tion On the Social and lieligious lationship through the females 
Condition of the Lower Baces of alone, or with the tribe alone. 
Man,’ 1870, p. 20. ® Mr. C. Staniland Wake 

‘ Origin of Civilisation,’ 1870, argues strongly (‘ Anthropo- 
p. 86. In the several works logia,’ March, 1874, p. 197) 
above quoted, there will be against the views held by these 


900 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past HI. 


marriage, in any strict sense of the word, has been 
gradually developed; and that almost promiscuous or 
very loose intercourse was once extremely common 
throughout the world. Nevertheless, from the strength 
of the feeling of jealousy all through the animal king- 
dom, as well as from the analogy of the lower animals, 
inore particularly of those which come nearest to man, 
I cannot believe that absolutely promiscuous intercourse 
prevailed in times past, shortly before man attained to 
his present rank in the zoological scale. Man, as I 
have attempted to shew, is certainly descended from 
some ape-like creature. With the existing Quadru- 
mana, as far as their habits are known, the males of 
some species are monogamous, hut live during only a 
part of the year with the females : of this the orang 
seems to afford an instance. Several kinds, for 
example some of the Indian and American monkeys, 
are strictly monogamous, and associate all the year 
round with their wives. Others are polygamous, for 
example the gorilla and several American species, and 
each family lives separate. Even when this occurs, 
the families inhabiting the same district are probably 
somewhat social ; the chimpanzee, for instance, is 
occasionally met with in large bands. Again, other 
species are polygamous, but several males, each with 
his own females, live associated in a body, as with 
several species of baboons.® We may indeed conclude 

three writers on the former hamadryas lives in great troops 

prevalence of almost promis- containing twice as many adult 

cuous intercourse ; and he thinks females as adult males. See 

that the classificatory system of Rengger on American polyga- 
relationship can be otherwise mous species, and Owen (‘ Anat. 
explained. of Vertebrates,’ vol. iii. p. 746) ou 

® Brehm (‘ Illust. Theirleben,’ American monogamous specie?. 
B. i. p. 77) says Cynoc^hcdvs Other references might be added. 


Chap. XX. MAN — CHECKS TO SEXUAL SELECTION. 901 

from what we know of the jealousy of all male 
quadrupeds, armed, as many of them are, with special 
weapons for battling with their rivals, that promiscuous 
intercourse in a state of nature is extremely im- 
probable. The pairing may not last for life, hut only 
for each birth ; yet if the males which are the strong- 
est and best able to defend or otherwise assist their 
females and young, were to select the more attractive 
females, this would suffice for sexual selection. • 

Therefore, looking far enough back in the stream of 
time, and judging from the social habits of man as he 
now exists, the most probable view is that he aborigin- 
ally lived in small communities, each with a single 
wife, or if powerful with several, whom he jealously 
guarded against all other men. Or he may not have 
been a social animal, and yet have lived with several 
wives, like the gorilla ; for all the natives “ agree that 
“ but one adult male is seen in a band ; when the 
“ young male grows up, a contest takes place for 
‘‘mastery, and the strongest, by killing and driving 
“out the others, establishes himself as the head of 
“ the community.” The younger males, being thus 
expelled and wandering about, would, when at last 
successful in finding a partner, prevent too close 
interbreeding within the limits of the same family. 

Although savages are now extremely licentious, and 
although communal marriages may formerly have 
largely prevailed, yet many tribes practise some form 
of marriage, but of a far more lax nature than that of 
civilised nations. Polygamy, as just stated, is almost 
universally followed by the leading men in every tribe. 

Dr. Savage, in ‘ Boston Journal of Nat. Hist.* vol. v. 1845-47, 
p. 423. 


902 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part til. 


Neyertheless there are tribes, standing almost at the 
bottom of the scale*, which are strictly monogamous. 
This is the case with the Yeddahs of Ceylon : they 
have a saying, according to Sir J. Lubbock, “that 
“ death alone can separate husband and wife.” An 
intelligent Kandyan chief, of course a polygamist, 
“was perfectly scandalised at the utter barbarism of 
“ living with only one wife, and never parting until 
“separated by death.” It was, he said, “just like the 
“Wanderoo monkeys.” Whether savages who now 
enter into some form of marriage, either polygamous 
or monogamous, have retained this habit from primeval 
times, or whether they have returned to some form of 
marriage, after passing through a stage of promiscuous 
intercourse, I will not pretend to conjecture. 

Infanticide . — This practice is now very common 
throughout the world, and there is reason to believe 
that it prevailed much more extensively during former 
times.'^ Barbarians find it difficult to support them- 
selves and their children, and it is a simple plan to 
kill their infants. In South America some tribes, 
according to Azara, formerly destroyed so many infants 
of both sexes that they were on the point of ex- 
tinction. In the Polynesian Islands women have been 
known to kill from four or five, to even ten of their 
children ; and Ellis could not find a single woman who 
had not killed at least one. In a village on the 
eastern frontier of India Colonel MacCulloch found not 
a single female child. Wherever infanticide prevails 

‘ Prehistoric Times,’ 1869, p. on exogamy and infanticide, pp. 
424. 130, 138, 165. 

Mr. M‘Lennan, ‘ Primitive Dr. Gerland (‘ Ueber das 

Marriage,’ 1865. See especially Aiissterben der Natorvolker,’ 


Chap. XX. MAN — CHECKS TO SEXUAL SELECTION. 903 

the struggle for existence will be in so far less severe, 
and all the members of the tribe will have an almost 
equally good chance of rearing their few surviving 
children. In most cases a larger number of female 
than of male infants are destroyed, for it is obvious 
that the latter are of more value to the tribe, as they 
will, when grown up, aid in defending it, and can 
support themselves. But the trouble experienced by 
the women in rearing children, their consequent loss 
of beauty, the higher estimation set on them when few, 
and their happier fate, are assigned by the women 
themselves, and by various observers, as additional 
motives for infanticide. 

When, owing to female infanticide, the women of a 
tribe were few, the habit of capturing wives from 
neighbouring tribes would naturally arise. Sir J. 
Lubbock, however, as we have seen, attributes the 
practice in chief part to the former existence of 
communal marriage, and to the men having conse- 
quently captured women from other tribes to hold as 
their sole property. Additional causes might be 
assigned, such as the communities being very small, in 
which case, marriageable women would often be 
deficient. That the habit was most extensively 
practised during former times, even by the ancestors 
of civilised nations, is clearly shewn by the preserva- 
tion of many curious customs and ceremonies, of which 

1868) has collected much iu- In the former reprints of the 

formation on infanticide, see 2nd edition of this book an 

t specially ss. 27, 51, 54. Azara incorrect quotation from Sir G. 

Voyages,’ &c. tom. ii. pp. 94, Grey was unfortunately given 

IIG) enters in detail on the in the above passage and has 

motives. See also M‘Lennan now been removed Loin the text, 

(ibid. p. 139) for cases in India. 


904 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part HI 


Mr. M‘Lennan has given an interesting account. In 
our own marriages the “ best man ” seems originally 
to have been the chief abettor of the bridegroom in the 
act of capture. Now as long as men habitually 
procured their wives through violence and craft, they 
would have been glad to seize on any woman, and 
would not have selected the more attractive ones. 
But as soon as the practice of procuring wives from a 
distinct tribe was effected through barter, as now occurs 
in many places, the more attractive women would 
generally have been purchased. The incessant crossing, 
however, between tribe and tribe, which necessarily 
follows from any form of this habit, would tend to keep 
all the people inhabiting the same country nearly uni- 
form in character; and this would interfere with the 
power of sexual selection in differentiating the tribes. 

The scarcity of women, consequent on female in- 
fanticide, leads, also, to another practice, that of 
polyandry, still common in several parts of the world, 
and which formerly, as Mr. M‘Lennan believes, pre- 
vailed almost universally : but this latter conclu- 
sion is doubted by Mr. Morgan and Sir J. Lubbock. 
Whenever two or more men are compelled to marry 
one woman, it is certain that all the women of the 
tribe will get married, and there will be no selection 
by the men of the more attractive women. But under 
these circumstances the women no doubt will have the 
power of choice, and will prefer the more attractive' 
men. Azara, for instance, describes how carefully a 
Guana woman bargains for all sorts of privileges, 

‘ Primitive Marriage,’ p. also Mr. Morgan, loc. cit., on 

208 ; Sir J. Lubbock, ‘ Origin the former prevalence of poly- 
of Civilisation,’ p. 100. See andry. 


Chap. XX. MAN — CHECKS TO SEXUAIi SELECTION. 905 

before accepting some one or more husbands ; and the 
men in consequence take unusual care of their 
personal appearance. So amongst the Todas of India, 
who practise polyandry, the girls can accept or refuse 
any man.^® A very ugly man in these cases ' would 
perhaps altogether fail in getting a wife, or get one 
later in life; hut the handsomer men, although more 
successful in obtaining wives, would not, as far as we 
can see, leave more offspring to inherit their beauty 
than the less handsome husbands of the same women. 

Early Betrothals and Slavery of Women . — With 
many savages it is the custom to betroth the females 
whilst mere infants ; and this would effectually 
prevent preference being exerted on either side 
according to personal appearance. But it would not 
prevent the more attractive women from being after- 
wards stolen or taken by force from their husbands by 
the more powerful men ; and this often happens in 
Australia, America, and elsewhere. The same conse- 
quences with reference to sexual selection would to a 
certain extent follow, when women are valued almost 
solely as slaves or beasts of burden, as is the case with 
many savages. The men, however, at all times would 
prefer the handsomest slaves according to their stand- 
ard of beauty. 

We thus see that several customs prevail with 
savages which must greatly interfere with, or com- 
pletely stop, the action of sexual selection. On the 
other hand, the conditions of life to which savages are 
exposed, and some of their habits, are favourable to 

Azara, * Voyages,’ tom. ii. pp. 92-96, Colonel Marshall 
‘ Amongst the Todas,’ p. 212. 


906 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


natural selection ; and this comes into play at the 
same time with sexual selection. Savages are known 
to suffer severely from recurrent famines ; they do not 
increase their food by artificial means ; they rarely 
refrain from marriage/® and generally marry whilst 
young. Consequently they must be subjected to 
' occasional hard struggles for existence, and the 
favoured individuals will alone survive. 

At a very early period, before man attained to his 
present rank in the scale, many of his conditions 
would be different from what now obtains amongst 
savages. Judging from the analogy of the lower 
animals, he would then either live with a single female, 
or be a polygamist. The most powerful and able 
males would succeed best in obtaining attractive 
females. They would also succeed best in the general 
struggle for life, and in defending their females, as 
well as their offspring, from enemies of all kinds. At 
this early period the ancestors of man would not be 
sufficiently advanced in intellect to look forward to 
distant contingencies ; they would not foresee that the 
rearing of all their children, especially their female 
children, would make the struggle for life severer for 
the tribe. They would be governed more by their 
instincts and less by their reason than are savages at 
the present day. They would not at that period have 
partially lost one of the strongest of all instincts, 
common to all the lower animals, namely, the love of 

^®Burchell says (‘Travels in (‘Voyages dans I’Amerique 
S. Africa,’ vol. ii. 1824, p. 58), Merid.’ tom. ii. 1809, p. 21) 
that among the wild nations of makes precisely the same remark 
Southern Africa, neither men in regard to the wild Indians of 
rmr Women ever pass their lives South America, 
m a state of celibacy. Azara 


Ob^p. XX. MAN — CHECKS TO SEXUAL SELECTION. 907 

their young offspring; and consequently they would 
not have practised female infanticide. W’omen would 
not have been thus rendered scarce, and polyandry 
would not have been practised ; for hardly any other 
cause, except the scarcity of women seems sufficient to 
break down the natural and widely prevalent feeling 
of jealousy, and the desire of each male to possess 
a female for himself. Polyandry would be a natural 
stepping-stone to communal marriages or almost pro- 
miscuous intercourse; though the best authorities 
believe that this latter habit preceded polyandry. 
During primordial times there would be no early 
betrothals, for this implies foresight. Nor would 
women be valued merely as useful slaves or beasts of 
burthen. Both sexes, if the females as well as the 
males were permitted to exert any choice, would choose 
their partners not for mental charms, or property, or 
social position, but almost solely from external appear- 
ance. All the adults would marry or pair, and all the 
offspring, as far as that was possible, would be reared ; 
so that the struggle for existence would be periodically 
excessively severe. Thus during these times all the 
conditions for sexual selection would have been more 
favourable than at a later period, when man had 
advanced in his intellectual powers but had retro- 
graded in his instincts. Therefore, whatever influence 
sexual selection may have had in producing the 
differences between the races of man, and between man 
and the higher Quadrumana, this influence would have 
been more powerful at a remote period than at the 
present day, though probably not yet wholly lost. 

r/w Mn nner of Action q/ Segmal Selection with Man^ 


908 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt UI. 


kind . — W ith primeval man under the favourable condi- 
tions just stated, and with those savages who at the 
present time enter into any marriage tie, sexual 
selection has probably acted in the following manner, 
subject to greater or less interference from female 
infanticide, early betrothals, &c. The strongest and 
most vigorous men — those who could best defend and 
hunt for their families, who were provided with the 
best weapons and possessed the most property, such 
as a large number of dogs or other animals, — would 
succeed in rearing a greater average number of offspring 
than the weaker and poorer members of the same tribes. 
There can, also, be no doubt that such men would 
generally be able to select the more attractive women. 
At present the chiefs of nearly every tribe throughout 
the world succeed in obtaining more than one wife. I 
hear from Mr. Mantell that, until recently, almost 
every girl in New Zealand who was pretty, or promised 
to be pretty, was ta'pu to some chief. With the Kafirs, 
as Mr. C. Hamilton states,^’ “ the chiefs generally have 
“ the pick of the women for many miles round, and are 
“ most persevering in establishing or confirming their 
“ privilege.” We have seen that each race has its own 
style of beauty, and we know that it is natural to man 
to admire each characteristic point in his domestic 
animals, dress, ornaments, and personal appearance, 
when carried a little beyond the average. If then the 
several foregoing propositions be admitted, and I can- 
not see that they are doubtful, it would be an inex- 
plicable circumstance if the selection of the more 
attractive women by the more powerful men of each 
tribe, who would rear on an average a greater number 

” * Anthropological Review,’ Jan. 1870, p. xvi. 


Chap. XX. MAN— MODE OF SEXUAL SELECTION. 909 

of children, did not after the lapse of many generations 
somewhat modify the character of the tribe. 

When a foreign breed of our domestic animals is 
introduced into a new country, or when a native breed 
is long and carefully attended to, either for use or 
ornament, it is found after several generations to have 
undergone a greater or less amount of change when- 
ever the means of comparison exist. This follows from 
unconscious selection during a long series of genera- 
tions — that is, the preservation of the most approved 
individuals — without any wish or expectation of such 
a result on the part of the breeder. So again, if during 
many years two careful breeders rear animals of the 
same family, and do not compare them together or 
with a common standard, the animals are found to 
have become, to the surprise of their owners, slightly 
different.^® Each breeder has impressed, as Yon 
Nathusius well expresses it, the character of his own 
mind — his own taste and judgment — on his animals. 
What reason, then, can be assigned why similar results 
should not follow from the long-continued selection of 
the most admired women by those men of each tribe 
who were able to rear the greatest number of children ? 
This would be unconscious selection, for an effect 
would be produced, independently of any wish or 
expectation on the part of the men who preferred 
certain women to others. 

Let us suppose the members of a tribe, practising 
some form of marriage, to spread over an unoccupied 
continent, they would soon split up into distinct 
hordes, separated from each other by various barriers, 

*• ‘ The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication, 
yol. h. 210-217. 


910 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


and still more effectually by the incessant wars between 
all barbarous nations. The hordes would thus be 
exposed to slightly different conditions and habits of 
life, and would sooner or later come to differ in some 
small degree. As soon as this occurred, each isolated 
tribe would form for itself a slightly different standard 
of beauty ; and then unconscious selection would 
come into action through the more powerful and 
leading men preferring certain women to others. 
Thus the differences between the tribes, at first very 
slight, would gradually and inevitably be more or less 
increased. 

With animals in a state of nature, many characters 
proper to the males, such as size, strength, special 
weapons, courage and pugnacity, have been acquired 
through the law of battle. The semi-human pro- 
genitors of man, like their allies the Quadrumana, will 
almost certainly have been thus modified ; and, as 
savages still fight for the possession of their women, a 
similar process of selection has probably gone on in a 
greater or less degree to the present day. Other 
characters proper to the males of the lower animals, 
such as bright colours and various ornaments, have 
been acquired by the more attractive males having 
been preferred by the ‘females. There are, however, 
exceptional cases in which the males are the selectors, 
instead of having been the selected. We recognise 
such cases by the females being more highly orna- 

An ingenious writer argues, even throughout Europe : see 
from a comparison of the pictures the ‘Lives of Haydn and 
of Raphael, Rubens, and modern Mozart,’ by Bombet (otherwise 
French artists, that the idea of M. Beyle), English translat. p. 
beauty is not absolutely the same 276* 


Chap. XX. MAN— MODE OF SEXUAL SELECTION. 911 

merited than the males, — their ornamental characters 
having been transmitted exclusively or chiefly to their 
female offspring. One such case has been described in 
the order to which man belongs, that of the Ehesus 
monkey. 

Man is more powerful in body and mind than woman, 
and in the savage state he keeps her in a far more 
abject state of bondage than does the male of any 
other animal ; therefore it is not surprising that he 
should have gained the power of selection. Women 
are everywhere conscious of the value of their own 
beauty ; and when they have the means, they take 
more delight in decorating themselves with all sorts of 
ornaments than do men. They borrow the plumes of 
male birds, with which nature has decked this sex, in 
order to charm the females. As women have long been 
selected for beauty, it is not surprising that some of 
their successive variations should have been transmitted 
exclusively to the same sex ; consequently that they 
should have transmitted beauty in a somewhat higher 
degree to their female than to their male offspring, and 
thus have become more beautiful, according to general 
opinion, than men. Women, however, certainly trans- 
mit most of their characters, including some beauty, to 
their offspring of both sexes ; so that the continued 
preference by the men of each race for the more 
attractive women, according to their standard of taste, 
will have tended to modify in the same manner all the 
individuals of both sexes belonging to the race. 

With respect to the other form of sexual selection 
(which with the lower animals is much the more common), 
namely, when the females are the selectors, and accept 
only those males which excite or charm them most, we 


912 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


have reason to believe that it formerly acted on our 
progenitors. Man in all probability owes his beard, 
and perhaps some other characters, to inheritance from 
an ancient progenitor who thus gained his ornaments. 
But this form of selection may have occasionally acted 
during later times ; for in utterly barbarous tribes the 
women have more power in choosing, rejecting, and 
tempting their lovers, or of afterwards changing their 
husbands, than might have been expected. As this is 
a point of some importance, I will give in detail such 
evidence as I have been able to collect. 

Hearne describes how a woman in one of the tribes 
of Arctic America repeatedly ran away from her hus- 
band and joined her lover ; and with the Charruas 
of S. America, according to -Azara, divorce is quite 
optional. Amongst the Abipones, a man on choosing a 
wife bargains with the parents about the price. But 
“ it frequently happens that the girl rescinds what has 
“ been agreed upon between the parents and the bride- 
groom, obstinately rejecting the very mention of 
marriage,” She often runs away, hides herself, and 
thus eludes the bridegroom. Captain Musters who 
lived with the Patagonians, says that their marriages 
are always settled by inclination ; ‘‘ if the parents 
‘‘ make a match contrary to the daughter’s will, she 
“ refuses and is never compelled to comply.” In Tierra 
del Fuego a young man first obtains the consent of 
the parents by doing them some service, and then he 
attempts to carry off the girl ; “ but if she is unwilling, 
“ she hides herself in the woods until her admirer is 
“ heartily tired of looking for her, and gives up the 
** pursuit ; but this seldom happens.” In the Fiji 
Islands the man seizes on the woman whom he wishes 


Chap. XX. MAN — MODE OF SEXUAL SELECTION. 91^ 

for his wife by actual or pretended force ; hut “ on 
“ reaching the home of her abductor, should she not 
^ approve of the match, she runs to some one who can 
‘‘ protect her ; if, however, she is satisfied, the matter 
“ is settled forthwith.” With the Kalmucks there is a 
regular race between the bride and bridegroom, the 
former having a fair start ; and Clarke ‘‘ was assured 
“ that no instance occurs of a girl being caught, unless 
“ she has a partiality to the pursuer.” Amongst the 
wild tribes of the Malay Archipelago there is also a 
racing match; and it appears from M. Bourien’s. 
account, as Sir J. Lubbock remarks, that “ the race, ‘ is 
“ not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,’ but to 
“ the young man who has the good fortune to please 
“his intended bride.” A similar custom, with the 
same result, prevails with the Koraks of North-Eastern 
Asia. 

Turning to Africa : the Kafirs buy their wives, and 
girls are severely beaten by their fathers if they will 
not accept a chosen husband ; but it is manifest from 
many facts given by the Kev. Mr. Shooter, that they 
have considerable power of choice. Thus very ugly, 
though rich men, have been known to fail in getting 
wives. The girls, before consenting to be betrothed, 
compel the men to shew themselves ofi* first in front 
and then behind, and “ exhibit their paces.” They 
have been known to propose to a man, and they not 
rarely run away with a favoured lover. So again, Mr. 
Leslie, who was intimately acquainted with the Kafirs, 
says, “ it is a mistake to imagine that a girl is sold by 
“her father in the same manner, and with the same 
“ authority, with which he would dispose of a cow.” 
Amongst the degraded Bushmen of S. Africa, “ when a 


914 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III 


“ girl has grown up to womanhood without having 
“ been betrothed, which, however, does not often 
“ happen, her lover must gain her approbation, as well 
“ as that of the parents.” Mr. Winwood Eeade made 
inquiries for me with respect to the negroes of Western 
Africa, and he informs me that the women, at least 
“ among the more intelligent Pagan tribes, have no 
“ difficulty in getting the husbands whom they may 
“ desire, although it is considered unwomanly to ask 
“ a man to marry them. They are quite capable of 
“falling in love, and of forming tender, passionate, 
“ and faithful attachments.” Additional cases could 
be given. 

We thus see that with savages the women are not in 
quite so abject a state in relation to marriage as has 
often been supposed. They can tempt the men whom 
they prefer, and can sometimes reject those whom they 
dislike, either before or after marriage. Preference on 
the part of the women, steadily acting in any one 
direction, would ultimately aflfect the character of the 
tribe ; for the women would generally choose not 
merely the handsomest men, according to their standard 
of taste, but those who were at the same time best able 


^ Azara ‘ Voyages,’ &c. tom, 
ii. p. 23. Dobrizlioffer, ‘ An Ac- 
count of the Abipones,’ voh.ii. 
1822, p. 207. Capt. Musters, in 
‘ Proc. R. Geo^aph. Soc.,’ vol. 
XV. p. 47. Wuliamson the Fiji 
Islanders, as quoted by Lubbock, 
' Origin of Civilisation,’ 1870, p. 
79. On the Fuegians,King and 
Fitzroy, ‘Voyages of the Ad- 
venture and Beagle,’ vol. ii. 1839, 
p. 182. On the Kalmucks, 
quoted by M‘Lennan, ‘ Primi- 


tive Marriage,’ 1865, p. 32. On 
the Malays, Lubbock, ibid. p. 76. 
The Rev. J. Shooter, ‘On the 
Kafirs of Natal,’ 1857, pp. 
52-60. Mr. D. Leslie, ‘Kafir 
Character and Customs,’ 1871, 
p. 4. On the Bush-men, Burch- 
ell, ‘ Travels in IS. Africa,’ vol. 
ii. 1824, p. 59. On the Koraks 
by McKennan, as quoted by Mr. 
Wake, in ‘ Anthropologia,’ Oct. 
1873, p. 75. 


Chap. XX. 


MAN — ABSENCE OF HAIB. 


915 


to defend and support them. Such well-endowed pairs 
would commonly rear a larger number of offspring 
than the less favoured. The same result would 
obviously follow in a still more marked manner if 
there was selection on both sides ; that is, if the more 
attractive, and at the same time more powerful men 
were to prefer, and were preferred by, the more attrac- 
tive women. And this double form of selection seems 
actually to have occurred, especially during the earlier 
periods of our long history. 

We will now examine a little more closely some of the 
characters which distinguish the several races of man 
from one another and from the lower animals, namely, 
the greater or less deficiency of hair on the body, and 
the colour of the skin. We need say nothing about the 
great diversity in the shape of the features and of the 
skull between the different races, as we have seen in 
the last chapter how different is the standard of beauty 
in these respects. These characters will therefore 
probably have been acted on through sexual selection ; 
but we have no means of judging whether they have 
been acted on chiefly from the male or female side. 
The musical faculties of man have likewise been already 
discussed. 

Absence of Hair on the Body, and its Development 
on the Face and Head , — From the presence of the 
woolly hair or lanugo on the human foetus, and of 
rudimentary hairs scattered over the body during 
maturity, we may infer that man is descended from 
some animal which was born hairy and remained so 
during life. The loss of hair is an inconvenience and 
probably an injury to man, even in a hot climate, for 


916 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt IIL 


he is thus exposed to the scorching of the sun, and to 
sudden chills, especially during wet weather. As Mr. 
Wallace remarks, the natives in all countries are glad 
to protect their naked backs and shoulders with some 
slight covering. No one supposes that the nakedness 
of the skin is any direct advantage to man ; his body 
therefore cannot have been divested of hair through 
natural selection.^^ Nor, as shewn in a former chapter, 
have we any evidence that this can be due to the direct 
action of climate, or that it is the result of correlated 
development. 

The absence of hair on the body is to a certain 
extent a secondary sexual character ; for in all parts 
of the world women are less hairy than men. There- 
fore we may reasonably suspect that this character 
has been gained through sexual selection. We know 
that the faces of several species of monkeys, and large 
surfaces at the posterior end of the body of other 
species, have been denuded of hair ; and this we may 
safely attribute to sexual selection, for these surfaces 
are not only vividly coloured, but sometimes, as with 
the male mandrill and female rhesus, much more vividly 
in the one sex than in the other, especially during the 
breeding-season. I am informed by Mr. Bartlett that, 
as these animals gradually reach maturity, the naked 


‘ Contributions to tbe Theory 
of Natural Selection,’ 1870, p. 
346. Mr. Wallace believes (p. 
350) “ that some intelligent 
“ power has guided or deter- 
“ mined the development of 
“ man ; ” and he considers the 
hairless condition of the skin as 
coming under this head. The 
Eev. T. R. Stcbbing, in com- 
menting on this view Transac- 


tions of Devonshire Assoc, for 
Science,’ 1870) remarks, that 
had Mr. Wallace “ employed his 
“ usual ingenuity on the ques- 
“ tion of man’s hairless skin, he 
“ might have seen the possibi- 
“ lity of its selection through its 
“ superior beauty or the health 
“attaching “to superior cleanli- 
“ ness.” 


Chap. XX. MAN — ABSENCE OF HAIR. 917 

surfaces grow larger compared with the size of their 
bodies. The hair, however, appears to have been 
removed, not for the sake of nudity, hut that the 
colour of the skin may be more fully displayed. So 
again with many birds, it appears as if the head and 
neck had been divested of feathers through sexual 
selection, to exhibit the brightly-coloured skin. 

As the body in woman is less hairy than in man, and 
as this character is common to all races, we may con- 
clude that it was our female semi-human ancestors 
who were first divested of hair, and that this occurred 
at an extremely remote period before the several races 
had diverged from a common stock. Yfhilst our female 
ancestors were gradually acquiring this new character 
of nudity, they must have transmitted it almost equally 
to their offspring of both sexes whilst young ; so that 
its transmission, as with the ornaments of many 
mammals and birds, has not been limited either by sex 
or age. There is nothing surprising in a partial loss of 
hair having been esteemed as an ornament by our ape- 
like progenitors, for we have seen that innumerable 
strange characters have been thu& esteemed by animals 
of all kinds, and have consequently been gained through 
sexual selection. Nor is it surprising that a slightly 
injurious character should have been thus acquired ; 
for we know that this is the case with the plumes of 
certain birds, and with the horns of certain stags. 

The females of some of the anthropoid apes, as stated 
in a former chapter, are somewhat less hairy on the 
under surface than the males ; and here we have what 
might have afibrded a commencement for the process 
of denudation. With respect to the completion of the 
process through sexual selection, it is well to bear in 


918 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Pabt ni. 


mind the New Zealand proverb, ‘‘There is no woman 
“ for a hairy man.” All who have seen photographs of 
the Siamese hairy family will admit how ludicrously 
hideous is the opposite extreme of excessive hairiness. 
And the king of Siam had to bribe a man to marry the 
first hairy woman in the family ; and she transmitted 
this character to her young offspring of both sexes.^^ 
Some races are much more hairy than others, 
especially the males ; but it must not be assumed that 
the more hairy races, such as the European, have 
retained their primordial condition more completely 
than the naked races, such as the Kalmucks or 


Americans. It is more probable that the hairiness of 
the former is due to partial reversion ; for characters 
which have been at some former period long inherited 
are always apt to return. We have seen that idiots 
are often very hairy, and they are apt to revert in 
other characters to a lower animal type. It does not 
appear that a cold climate has been influential in 
leading to this kind of reversion ; excepting perhaps 
with the negroes, who have been reared during several 
generations in the United States,^^ and possibly with 


22 ‘ The Variation of Animals 
and Plants imder Domestication,’ 
vol. ii. 1868, p. 327. 

23 ‘Investigations into Mili- 
tary and Anthropological Statis- 
tics of American Soldiers,’ by B. 
A. Gould, 1869; p. 568 Ob- 
servations were carefully made 
on the hairiness of 2129 black 
and coloured soldiers, whilst they 
were bathing ; and by looking to 
the published table, “ it is mani- 
“fest at a glance that there is 
“ but little, if any, difference be- 
‘‘ tween the white and the black 
“ races in this respect.” It is, 


however, certain that negroes in 
their native and much hotter 
land of Africa, have remarkably 
smooth bodies. It should be 
particularly observed, that both 
pure blacks and mulattoes were 
included in the above enumera- 
tion ; and this is an unfortunate 
circumstance, as in accordance 
with a principle, the tmth of 
which I have elsewhere proved 
crossed races of man would be 
eminently liable to revert to the 
primordial hairy character of 
their early ape-like progenitors. 


Chap, XX. 


EEAKDS. 


919 


the Ainos, who inhabit the northern islands of the 
Japan archipelago. Eut the laws of inheritance are so 
complex that we can seldom understand their action. 
If the greater hairiness of certain races be the result 
of reversion, unchecked by any form of selection, its 
extreme variability, even within the limits of the same 
race, ceases to be remarkable. 

With respect to the beard in man, if we turn to our 
best guide, the Quadrumana, we find beards equally 
developed in both sexes of many species, but in some, 
either confined to the males, or more developed in them 
than in the females. From this fact and from the 
curious arrangement, as well as the bright colours of 
the hair about the heads of many monkeys, it is highly 
probable, as before explained, that the males first 
acquired their beards through sexual selection as an 
ornament, transmitting them in most cases, equally or 
nearly so, to their ofi'spring of both sexes. We know 
from Eschricht^^ that with mankind the female as well 
as the male foetus is furnished with much hair on the 
face, especially round the mouth ; and this indicates 
that we are descended from progenitors of whom both 
sexes were bearded. It appears therefore at first sight 
probable that man has retained his beard from a very 
early period, whilst woman lost her beard at the same 


“ Hardly any view advanced 
in this work has met with so 
much disfavour (see for instance, 
Spengel, ‘ Die Fortschritte dcs 
Darwinismus,’ 1874, p. 80) as 
the above explanation of the loss 
of hair in mankind through 
sexual selection ; but none of 
the opposed arguments seem to 
me of much weight, in compari- 


son with the facts shewing that 
the nudity of the skin is to a 
certain extent a secondary sexual 
character in man and in some of 
the Quadiumana. 

“ ‘ Ueber die Richtung der 
Haare am Menschlichen Korper,’ 
in Muller’s ‘Archiv fiir Anat. 
und Rhys.’ 1837, s. 40. 


920 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pabt UL 


time that her body became almost completely divested 
of hair. Even the colour of our beards seems to have 
been inherited from an ape-like progenitor ; for when 
there is any difference in tint between the hair of the 
head and the beard, the latter is lighter coloured in all 
monkeys and in man. In those Quadrumana in which 
the male has a larger beard than that of the female, it 
is fully developed only at maturity, just as with man- 
kind ; and it is possible that only the later stages of 
development have been retained by man. In opposi- 
tion to this view of the retention of the beard from 
an early period is the fact of its great variability in 
different races, and even within the same race ; for 
this indicates reversion, — long lost characters being 
very apt to vary on re-appearance. 

Nor must we overlook the part which sexual selec 
tion may have played in later times ; for we know 
that with savages the men of the beardless races take 
infinite pains in eradicating every hair from their 
faces as something odious, whilst the men of the 
bearded races feel the greatest pride in their beards. 
The women, no doubt, participate in these feelings, 
and if so sexual selection can hardly have failed to 
have effected something in the course of later times. 
It is also possible that the long-continued habit of 
eradicating the hair may have produced an inherited 
eflhct. Dr. Brown-Sequard has shewn that if certain 
animals are operated on in a particular manner, their 
offspring are affected. Further evidence could be given 
of the inheritance of the effects of mutilations ; but 
a fact lately ascertained by Mr. Salvin^*^ has a more 

^ On the tail-feathers of Momotus, ‘ Proc. Zoolog. Soc.,’ 1873, 
p. 429. 


Ghap. XX. 


BEARDS. 


921 


direct bearing on the present question ; for he has 
shewn that the motmots, which are known habitually 
to bite off the barbs of the two central tail-feathers, 
haye the barbs of these feathers naturally somewhat 
r^duced.^^ Nevertheless, with mankind the habit of 
eradicating the beard and the hairs on the body would 
probably not have arisen until these had already be* 
come by some means reduced. 

It is difficult to form any judgment as to how the 
hair on the head became developed to its present great 
length in many races. Eschricht^® states that in the 
human foetus the hair on the face during the fifth 
month is longer than that on the head; and this 
indicates that our semi-human progenitors were not 
furnished with long tresses, which must therefore have 
been a late acquisition. This is likewise indicated by 
the extraordinary difference in the length of the hair 
in the different races ; in the negro the hair forms a 
mere curly mat; with us it is of great length, and 
with the American natives it not rarely reaches to the 
ground. Some species of Semnopithecus have their 
heads covered with moderately long hair, and this 
probably selves as an ornament and was acquired 
through sexual selection. The same view may perhaps 
be extended to mankind, for we know that long 
tresses are now and were formerly much admired, 
as may be observed in the works of almost every 
poet ; St. Paul says, “ if a woman have long hair, it 
is a glory to her ; ” and we have seen that in North 

Mr. Sproat has suggested Gosse of Geneva, believe that 
(‘Scenes and Studies oi Savage artificial modifications of the 
Life,’ 1868, p. 25) this same skull tend to be inherited, 
view. Some distinguished eth- ‘ Ueber die Richtuiig,’ ibid, 

nologists, amongst others M. s. 40. 


922 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Pa^t m. 


America a chief was elected solely from the length of 
his hair. 

Coheir of the Shin . — The best kind of evidence that 
in man the colour of the skin has been modified through 
sexual selection is scanty ; for in most races the sexes 
do not differ in this respect, and only slightly, as we 
have seen, in others. We know, however, from the 
many facts already given that the colour of the skin is 
regarded by the men of all races as a highly important 
element in their beauty ; so that it is a character 
which would he likely to have been modified through 
selection, as has occurred in innumerable instances 
with . the lower animals. It seems at first sight a 
monstrous supposition that the jet-hlackness of the 
negro should have been gained through sexual selec- 
tion ; hut this view is supported by various analogies, 
and we know that negroes admire their own colour. 
With mammals, when the sexes differ in colour, the 
male is often black or much darker than the female ; 
and it depends merely on the form of inheritance 
whether this or any other tint is transmitted to both 
sexes or to one alone. The resemblance to a negro in 
miniature of Fithecia satanas with his jet black skin, 
white rolling eyeballs, and hair parted on the top of 
the head, is almost ludicrous. 

The colour of the face differs much more widely in 
the various kinds of monkeys than it does in the races 
of man ; and we have some reason to believe that the 
red, blue, orange, almost white and black tints of their 
skin, even when commor to both sexes, as well as the 
bright colours of their f»^r, and the ornamental tufts 
about the head, have all been acquired through sexual 


Chap. XX. 


SUMMAEY ON MAN. 


923 


selection. As the order of development during growth, 
generally indicates the order in which the characters 
of a species have been developed and modified during 
previous generations ; and as the newly-born infants 
of the various races of man do not differ nearly as 
much in colour as do the adults, although their bodies 
are as completely destitute of hair, we have some slight 
evidence that the tints of the different races were 
acquired at a period subsequent to the removal of the 
hair, which must have occurred at a very early period 
in the history of man. 

Summary , — We may conclude that the greater size, 
strength, courage, pugnacity, and energy of man, in 
comparison with woman, were acquired during primeval 
times, and have subsequently been augmented, chiefly 
through the contests of rival males for the possession 
of the females. The greater intellectual vigour and 
power of invention in man is probably due to natural 
selection, combined with the inherited effects of habit, 
for the most able men will have succeeded best in 
defending and providing for themselves and for their 
wives and offspring. As far as the extreme intricacy 
of the subject permits us to judge, it appears that our 
male ape-like progenitors acquired their beards as an 
ornament to charm or excite the opposite sex, and 
transmitted them only to their male offspring. The 
females apparently first had their bodies denuded of 
hair, also as a sexual ornament ; but they transmitted 
this character almost equally to both sexes. It is not 
improbable that the females were modified in other 
respects for the same purpose and by the same means ; 


924 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past III, 


BO that women have acquired sweeter voices and be- 
come more beautiful than men. 

It deserves attention that with mankind the condi- 
tions were in many respects much more favourable for 
sexual selection, during a very early period, when man 
had only just attained to the rank of manhood, than 
during later times. For he would then, as we may 
safely conclude, have been guided more by his instinc- 
tive passions, and less by foresight or reason. He 
would have jealously guarded his wife or wives. He 
would not have practised infanticide; nor valued his 
wives merely as useful slaves ; nor have been betrothed 
to them during infancy. Hence we may infer that 
the races of men were difierentiated, as far as sexual 
selection is concerned, in chief part at a very remote 
epoch ; and this conclusion throws light on the remark- 
able fact that at the most ancient period, of which we 
have as yet any record, the races of man had already 
come to differ nearly or quite as much as they do at 
the present day. 

The views here advanced, on the part which sexual 
selection has played in the history of man, want 
scientific precision. He who does not admit this agency 
in the case of the lower animals, will disregard all that 
I have written in the later chapters on man. We 
cannot positively say that this character, but not that, 
has been thus modified ; it has, however, been shewn 
that the races of man difier from each other and from 
their nearest allies, in certain characters which are of 
no service to them in their daily habits of life, and 
which it is extremely probable would have been modified 
through sexual selection. We have seen that with the 
lowest savages the people of each tribe admire their 


Chap. XX. SUMMAKY ON MAN. , 925 

own characteristic qualities, — the shape of the head 
and face, the squareness of the cheek-bones, the promi- 
nence or depression of the nose, the colour of the skin, 
the length of the hair on the head, the absence of hair 
on the face and body, or the presence of a great heard, 
and so forth. Hence these and other such points could 
hardly fail to be slowly and gradually exaggerated, 
from • the more powerful and able men in each tribe, 
who would succeed in rearing the largest number of 
-offspring, having selected during many generations for 
their wives the most strongly characterised and there- 
fore most attractive women. For my own part I 
conclude that of all the causes which have led to the 
differences in external appearance between the races of 
man, and to a certain extent between man and the 
lower animals, sexual selection has been the most 
efficient. 


926 


TBE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Past III 


CHAPTEE XXI. 

Geneeal Summary and Conclusion. 

Main conclusion that man is descended from some lower form — 
Manner of development — Genealogy of man — Intellectual and 
moral faculties — Sexual Selection — Concluding remarks. 

A BRIEF summary will be sufldcient to recall to the 
reader’s mind the more salient points in this work. 
Many of the views which have been advanced are highly 
speculative, and some no doubt will prove erroneous ; 
but I have in every case given the reasons which have 
led me to one view rather than to another. It seemed 
worth while to try how far the principle of evolution 
would throw light on some of the more complex pro- 
blems in the natural history of man. False facts are 
highly injurious to the progress of science, for they 
often endure long; but false views, if supported by 
some evidence, do little harm, for every one takes a 
salutary pleasure in proving their falseness : and when 
this is done, one path towards error is closed and the 
road to truth is often at the same time opened. 

The main conclusion here arrived at, and now held 
by many naturalists who are well competent to form a 
sound judgment, is that man is descended from some 
less highly organised form. The grounds upon which 
this conclusion rests will never be shaken, for the close 
similarity between man and the lower animals in 


Chap. XXI. 


GENERAL SUMMARY. 


927 


embjyonic development, as well as in innumerable 
points of structure and constitution, both of bigh and 
of the most trifling importance, — the rudiments which 
he retains, and the abnormal reversions to which he is 
occasionally liable, — are facts which cannot be disputed. 
They have long been known, but until recently they 
told us nothing with respect to the origin of man. 
Now when viewed by the light of our knowledge of the 
whole organic world, their meaning is unmistakable. 
The great principle of evolution stands up clear and 
firm, when these groups oi facts are considered in 
connection with others, such as the mutual affinities of 
the members of tne same group, their geographical 
distribution in past and present times, and their 
geological succession. It is incredible that all these 
facts should speak falsely. He who is not content to 
look, like a savage, at the phenomena of nature as 
disconnected, cannot any longer believe that man is the 
work of a separate act of creation. He will be forced 
to admit that the close resemblance of the embryo of 
man to that, for instance, of a dog — the construction 
of his skull, limbs and whole frame on the same plan 
with that of other mammals, independently of the uses 
to which the parts may be put — the occasional re- 
appearance of various structures, for instance of several 
muscles, which man does not normally possess, but 
which are common to the Quadrumana — and a crowd 
of analogous facts — all point in the plainest manner to 
the conclusion that man is the co-descendant with 
other mammals of a common progenitor. 

We have seen that man incessantly presents indi- 
vidual differences in all parts of his body and in his 
mental faculties. These Jifferences or variations seem 


928 THE DESCENT OF MAN. Fart lit 

to be induced by the same general causes, and to obey 
the same laws as with the lower animals. In both 
cases similar laws of inheritance prevail. Man tends 
to increase at a greater rate than his means of sub- 
sistence ; consequently he is occasionally subjected to 
a severe struggle for existence, and natural selection 
will have effected whatever lies within its scope. A 
succession of strongly-marked variations of a similar 
nature is by no means requisite ; slight fluctuating 
differences in the individual suffice for the work of 
natural selection ; not that we have any reason to 
suppose that in the same species, all parts of the 
organisation tend to vary to the same degree. We 
may feel assured that the inherited effects of the long- 
continued use or disuse of parts will have done much 
in the same direction with natural selection. Modifi- 
cations formerly of importance, though no longer of 
any special use, are long-inherited. When one part is 
modified, other parts change through the principle of 
correlation, of which we have instances in many 
curious cases of correlated monstrosities. Something 
may be attributed to the direct and definite action of 
the surrounding conditions of life, such as abundant 
food, heat or moisture ; and lastly, many characters of 
slight physiological importance, some indeed of con- 
siderable importance, have been gained through sexual 
selection. 

No doubt man, as well as every other animal, 
presents structures, which seem to our limited know- 
ledge, not to be now of any service to him, nor to have 
been so formerly, either for the general conditions of 
life, or in the relations of one sex to the other. Such 
structures cannot be accounted for by any form of 


Chap. XXL 


GENERAL SUMMARY. 


929 


selection, or by the inherited effects of the use and 
disuse of parts. ^We know, however, that many strange 
and strongly- marked peculiarities of structure occasion- 
ally appear in our domesticated productions, and if 
their unknown causes were to act more uniformly, 
they would probably become common to all the 
individuals of the species. We may hope hereafter 
to understand something about the causes of such 
occasional modifications, especially through the study 
of monstrosities : hence the labours of experimentalists, 
such as those of M. Camille Dareste, are full of promise 
for the future. In general we can only say that the 
cause of each slight variation and of each monstrosity 
lies much more in the constitution of the organism, 
than in the nature of the surrounding conditions; 
though new and changed conditions certainly play an 
important part in exciting organic changes of many 
kinds. 

Through the means just specified, aided perhaps by 
others as yet undiscovered, man has been raised to his 
present state. But since he attained to the rank of 
manhood, he has diverged into distinct races, or as 
they may be more fitly called, sub-species. Some of 
these, such as the Negro and European, are so distinct 
that, if specimens had been brought to a naturalist 
.without any further information, they would un- 
doubtedly have been considered by him as good and 
true species. Nevertheless all the races agree in so 
many unimportant details of structure and in so many 
mental peculiarities, that these can be accounted fur 
only by inheritance from a common progenitor ; and a 
progenitor thus characterised would probably deserve 
to rank as man. o 


930 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IIL 


It must not be supposed that the divergence of each 
race from the other races, and of all from a common 
stock, can be traced back to any one pair of pro- 
genitors. On the contrary, at every stage in the 
process of modification, all the individuals which were 
in any way better fitted for their conditions of life, 
though in different degrees, would have survived in 
greater numbers than the less well-fitted. The process 
would have been like that followed by man, when he 
does not intentionally select particular individuals, but 
breeds from all the superior individuals, and neglects the 
inferior. He thus slowly but surely modifies his stock, 
and unconsciously forms a new strain. So with respect to 
modifications acquired independently of selection, and 
due to variations arising from the nature of the 
organism and the action of the surrounding con- 
ditions, or from changed habits of life, no single pair 
will have been modified much more than the other 
pairs inhabiting the same country, for all will have 
been continually blended through free intercrossing. 

By considering the embryological structure of man, 
— the homologies which he presents with the lower 
animals, — the rudiments which he retains, — and the 
reversions to which he is liable, we can partly recall 
in imagination the former condition of our early 
progenitors.; and can approximately place them in 
their proper place in the zoological series. We thus 
learn that man is descended from a hairy, tailed 
quadruped, probably arboreal in its habits, and an 
inhabitant of the Old World. This creature, if its 
whole structure had been examined by a naturalist, 
would have been classed amongst the Quadramana, as 
surely as the still more ancient progenitor of the Old 


Chap. XXI. 


GENERAL SUMMARY. 


931 


and New World monkeys. The Quadrumana and all 
the higher mammals are probably derived from an 
ancient marsupial animal, and this through a long 
line of diversified forms, from some amphibian-like 
creature, and this again from some fish-like animal. 
In the dim obscurity of the past we can see that the 
early progenitor of all the Yertebrata must have been 
an aquatic animal, provided with branchise, with the 
two sexes united in the same individual, and with the 
most important organs of the body (such as the brain 
and heart) imperfectly or not at all developed. This 
animal seems to have been more like the larvae of the 
existing marine Ascidians than any other known form. 

The high standard of our intellectual powers and 
moral disposition is the greatest difficulty which 
presents itself, after we have been driven to this 
conclusion on the origin of man. But every one who 
admits the principle of evolution, must see that the 
mental powers of the higher animals, which are the 
same in kind with those of man, though so different in 
degree, are capable of advancement. Thus the interval 
between the mental powers of one of the higher apes 
and of a fish, or between those of an ant and scale- 
insect, is immense ; yet their development does not 
offer any special difficulty ; for with our domesticated 
animals, the mental faculties are certainly variable, 
and the variations are inherited. No one doubts that 
they are of the utmost importance to animals in a 
state of nature. Therefore the conditions are favour- 
able for their development through natural selection. 
Tiie same conclusion may be extended to man; the 
intellect must have been all-important to him, even at 


932 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part IIL 


a very remote period, as enabling him to invent and 
use language, to make weapons, tools, traps, &c., 
whereby with the aid of his social habits, he long ago 
became the most dominant of all living creatures. 

A great stride in the development of the intellect 
will have followed, as soon as the half-art and half- 
instinct of language came into use ; for the continued 
use of language will have reacted on the brain and 
produced an inherited effect ; and this again will have 
reacted on the improvement of language. As Mr. 
Chauncey Wright^ has well remarked, the largeness of 
the brain in man relatively to his body, compared with 
the lower animals, may be attributed in chief part to 
the early use of some simple form of language, — that 
wonderful engine which affixes signs to all sorts of 
objects and qualities, and excites trains of thought 
which would never arise from the mere impression of 
the senses, or if they did arise could not be followed 
out. The higher intellectual powers of man, such as 
those of ratiocination, abstraction, self-consciousness, 
&c., probably follow from the continued improvement 
and exercise of the other mental faculties. 

The development of the moral qualities is a more 
interesting problem. The foundation lies in the social 
instincts, including under this term the family ties. 
These instincts are highly complex, and in the case 
of the lower animals give special tendencies towards 
certain definite actions ; but the more important ele- 
ments are love, and the distinct emotion of sympathy. 
Animals endowed with the social instincts take pleasure 
in one another’s company, warn one another of danger, 

^ ‘ On the Limits of Natural Selection,’ in the ‘ North American 
Review,’ Oct. 1870, p. 295, 


Chap. XXL 


GKNEliAL SUMMAKY. 


933 


defend and aid one another in many ways. These 
instincts do not extend to all the individuals of the 
species, but only to those of the same community. As 
they are highly beneficial to the species, they have in 
all probability been acquired through natural selec- 
tion. 

A moral being is one who is capable of reflecting on 
his past actions and their motives — of approving of 
some and disapproving of others ; and the fact that 
man is the one being who certainly deserves this 
designation, is the greatest of all distinctions between 
him and the lower animals. But in the fourth chapter 
I have endeavoured to shew that the moral sense 
follows, firstly, from the enduring and ever-present 
nature of the social instincts ; secondly, from man’s 
appreciation of the approbation and disapprobation of 
his fellows ; and thirdly, from the high activity of his 
mental faculties, with past impressions extremely 
vivid ; and in these latter respects he differs from the 
lower animals. Owing to this condition of mind, man 
cannot avoid looking both backwards and forwards, 
and comparing past impressions. Hence after some 
temporary desire or passion has mastered his social 
instincts, he reflects and compares the now weakened 
impression of such past impulses with the ever-present 
social instincts ; and he then feels that sense of dis- 
satisfaction which all unsatisfied instincts leave behind 
them, he therefore resolves to act differently for the 
future, — and this is conscience. Any instinct, perma- 
nently stronger or more enduring than another, gives 
rise* to a feeling which we* express by saying that it 
ought to be obeyed. A pointer dog, if able to reflect 
on his past conduct, would say to himself, I ought (as 


934 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III 


indeed we say of him) to have pointed at that hare 
and not have yielded to the passing temptation of 
hunting it. 

Social animals are impelled partly by a wish to aid 
the members of their community in a general manner, 
but more commonly to perform certain definite actions. 
Man is impelled by the same general wish to aid his 
fellows ; but has few or no special instincts. He 
differs also from the lower animals in the power of 
expressing his desires by words, which thus become a 
guide to the aid required and bestowed. The motive 
to give aid is likewise much modified in man : it no 
longer consists solely of a blind instinctive impulse, 
but is much influenced by the praise or blame of his 
fellows. The appreciation and the bestowal of praise 
and blame both rest on sympathy ; and this emotion, 
as we have seen, is one of the most important elements 
of the social instincts. Sympathy, though gained as 
an instinct, is also much strengthened by exercise or 
habit. As all men desire their own happiness, praise 
or blame is bestowed on actions and motives, according 
as they lead to this end ; and as happiness is an 
essential part of the general good, the greatest-happi- 
ness principle indirectly serves as a nearly safe 
standard of right and wrong. As the reasoning 
powers advance and experience is gained, the remoter 
effects of certain lines of conduct on the character of 
the individual, and on the general good, are perceived ; 
and then the self-regarding virtues come within the 
scope of public opinion, and receive praise, and their 
opposites blame. But with the less civilised nations 
reason often errs, and many bad customs and base 
superstitions come within the same scope, and are 


CnAi>. XXL GENERAL SUMMARY. 935 

then esteemed as high virtues, and their breach as 
heavy crimes. 

The moral faculties are generally and justly esteemed 
as of higher value than the intellectual powers. But 
we should bear in mind that the activity of the mind 
in vividly recalling past impressions is one of the 
fundamental though secondary bases of conscience. 
This affords the strongest argument for educating 
and stimulating in all possible ways the intellectual 
faculties of every human being. No doubt a man 
with a torpid mind, if his social affections and sym- 
pathies are well developed, will be led to good actions, 
and may have a fairly sensitive conscience. But 
whatever renders the imagination more vivid and 
strengthens the habit of recalling and comparing past 
impressions, will make the conscience more sensitive, 
and may even somewhat compensate for weak social 
affections and sympathies. 

The moral nature of man has reached its present 
standard, partly through the advancement of his 
reasoning powers and consequently of a just public 
opinion, but especially from his sympathies having 
been rendered more tender and widely diffused through 
the effects of habit, example, instruction, and reflection. 
It is not improbable that after long practice virtuous 
tendencies may be inherited. With the more civilised 
races, the conviction of the existence of an all-seeing 
Deity has had a potent influence on the advance of 
morality. Ultimately man does not accept the praise 
or blame of his fellows as his sole guide, though few 
escape this influence, but his habitual convictions, 
controlled by reason, afford him the safest rule. His 
conscience then becomes the supreme judge and 


936 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


. Paut hi. 


monitor. Nevertheless the first foundation or origin 
of the moral sense lies in the social instincts, includiug 
sympathy ; and these instincts no doubt were primarily 
gained, as in the case of the lower animals, through 
natural selection. 

The belief in God has often been advanced as not 
only the greatest, but the most complete of all the 
distinctions between man and the lower animals. It 
is however impossible, as we have seen, to maintain 
that this belief is innate or instinctive in man. On 
the other hand a belief in all* pervading spiritual 
agencies seems to be universal ; and apparently follows 
from a considerable advance in man’s reason, and from 
a still greater advance in his faculties of imagination, 
curiosity and wonder. I am aware that the assumed 
instinctive belief in God has been used by many 
persons as an argument for His existence. But this 
is a rash argument, as we should thus be compelled to 
believe in the existence of many cruel and malignant 
spirits, only a little more powerful than man ; for the 
belief in them is far more general than in a beneficent 
Deity. The idea of a universal and beneficent Creator 
does not seem to arise in the mind of man, until he 
has been elevated by long-continued culture 

He who believes in the advancement of man from 
some low organised form, will naturally ask how does 
this bear on the belief in the immortality of the soul. 
The barbarous races of man, as Sir J. Lubbock has 
shewn, possess no clear belief of this kind ; but argu- 
ments derived from the primeval beliefs of savages are, 
as we have just seen, of little or no avail. Few persons 
feel any anxiety from the impossibility of determining 


Chat. XXI. 


GENERAL SUMMARY. 


937 


at what precise period in the development of <he 
individual, from the first trace of a minute germinal 
vesicle, man becomes an immortal being ; and there is 
no greater cause for anxiety because the period cannot 
possibly be determined in the gradually ascending 
organic scale.^ 

I am aware that the conclusions arrived at in this 
work will be denounced by some as highly irreligious ; 
but he who denounces them is bound to shew why it is 
more irreligious to explain the origin of man as a 
distinct species by descent from some lower form, 
through the laws of variation and natural selection, 
than to explain the birth of the individual through the 
laws of ordinary reproduction. The birth both of the 
species and of the individual are equally parts of that 
grand sequence of events, which our minds refuse to 
accept as the result of blind chance. The understanding 
revolts at such a conclusion, whether or not we ate 
able to believe that every slight variation of structure, 
— the union of each pair in marriage, — the dissemina- 
tion of each seed, — and other such events, have all been 
ordained for some special purpose. 

Sexual selection has been treated at great length in 
this work; for, as I have attempted to shew, it has 
played an important part in the history of the organic 
world. I am aware that much remains doubtful, but 
I have endeavoured to give a fair view of the whole 
case. In the lower divisions of the animal kingdom, 
sexual selection seems to have done nothing : such 
animals are often affixed for life to the same spot, or 

The Rev. J. A. Picton gives a discussion to this effect in liis 
‘New Theories and the Old Faith,’ 1870. 


938 


THE DESCENT OP MAN. 


Part III. 


have the sexes combined in the same individual, or 
what is still more important, their perceptive and 
intellectual faculties are not sufficiently advanced to 
allow of the feelings of love and jealousy, or of the 
exertion of choice. When, however, we come to the 
Arthropoda and Yertebrata, even to the lowest classes 
'in these two great Sub-Kingdoms, sexual selection has 
effected much. 

In the several great classes of the animal kingdom, 
— in mammals, birds, reptiles, fishes, insects, and even 
crustaceans, — the differences between the sexes follow 
nearly the same rules. The males are almost always 
the wooers; and they alone are armed with special 
weapons for fighting with their rivals. They are 
generally stronger and larger than the females, and 
are endowed with the requisite qualities of courage and 
pugnacity. They are provided, either exclusively or in 
a much higher degree than the females, with organs 
for vocal or instrumental music, and- with odoriferous 
glands. They are ornamented with infinitely diversified 
appendages, and with the most brilliant or conspicuous 
colours, often arranged in elegant patterns, whilst the 
females are unadorned. When the sexes differ in more 
important structures, it is the male which is provided 
with special sense-organs for discovering the female, 
with locomotive organs for reaching her, and often 
with prehensile organs for holding her. These various 
structures for charming or securing the female are 
often developed in the male during only part of the 
year, namely the breeding-season. They have in many 
cases been more or less transferred to the females ; 
and in the latter, case they often appear in her as mere 
rudiments. They are lost or never gained by the 


Chap XXI. 


GENERAL SUMMARY. 


939 


males after emasculation. Generally they are not 
developed in the male during early youth, but appear 
a short time before the age for reproduction. Hence 
in most cases the young of both sexes resemble each 
other ; and the female somewhat resembles her young 
offspring throughout life. In almost every great class 
a few anomalous cases occur, where there has been an 
almost complete transposition of the characters proper 
to the two sexes ; the females assuming characters 
which properly belong to the males. This surprising 
uniformity in the laws regulating the differences be- 
tween the sexes in so many and such widely separated 
classes, is intelligible if we admit the action of one 
common cause, namely sexual selection. 

Sexual selection depends on the success of certain 
individuals over others of the same sex, in relation to 
the propagation of the species ; whilst natural selec- 
tion depends on the success of both sexes, at all ages, 
in relation to the general conditions of life. The 
sexual struggle is of two kinds ; in the one it is be- 
tween the individuals of the same sex, generally the 
males, in order to drive away or kill their rivals, 
the females remaining passive; whilst in the other, 
the struggle is likewise between the individuals of the 
same sex, in order to excite or charm those of the 
opposite sex, generally the females, which no longer 
remain passive, but select the more agreeable partners. 
This latter kind of selection is closely analogous to 
that which man unintejitionally, yet effectually, brings 
to bear on his domesticated productions, when he 
preserves during ar long period the most pleasing or 
useful individuals, without any wish to moolify the 
breed. 


940 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


tabt hi. 


The laws of inheritance determine whether characters 
gained through sexual selection by either sex shall be 
transmitted to the same sex, or to both ; as well as the 
age at which they shall be developed. It appears that 
variations arising late in life are commonly trans- 
mitted to one and the same sex. Variability is the 
necessary basis for the action of selection, and is wholly 
independent of it. It follows from this, that variations 
of the same general nature have often been taken 
advantage of and accumulated through sexual selection 
in relation to the propagation of the species, as well as 
through natural selection in relation to the general 
purposes of life. Hence secondary sexual characters, 
when equally transmitted to both sexes can be distin- 
guished from ordinary specific characters only by the 
light of analogy. The modifications acquired through 
sexual selection are often so strongly pronounced that 
the two sexes have frequently been ranked as distinct 
species, or even as distinct genera. Such strongly- 
marked difi’erences must be in some manner highly 
important ; and we know that they have been acquired 
in some instances at the cost not only of inconvenience, 
but of exposure to actual danger. 

The belief in the power of sexual selection rests 
chiefly on the following considerations. Certain cha- 
racters are confined to one sex ; and this alone renders 
it probable that in most cases they are connected with 
the act of reproduction. In innumerable instances 
these characters are fully developed only at maturity, 
and often during only a part of the year, which is 
always the breeding-season. The males (passing over 
a few exceptional cases) are the more active in court- 
ship ; they are the better armed, and are rendered the 


Chap. XXI. 


GENEKAL SUMMARY. 


941 


more attractive in various ways. It is to be especially 
observed that the males display their attractions with 
elaborate care in the presence of the females ; and that 
they rarely or never display them excepting during the 
season of love. It is incredible that all this should be 
purposeless. Lastly we have distinct evidence with 
some quadrupeds and birds, that the individuals of 
one sex are capable of feeling a strong antipathy or 
preference for certain individuals of the other sex. 

Bearing in mind these facts, and the marked results 
of man’s unconscious selection, when applied to domesti- 
cated animals and cultivated plants, it seems to me 
almost certain that if the individuals of one sex were 
during a long series of generations to prefer pairing 
with certain individuals of the other sex, characterised 
in some peculiar manner, the offspring would slowly 
but surely become modified in this same manner. I 
have not attempted to conceal that, excepting when the 
males are more numerous than the females, or when 
polygamy prevails, it is doubtful how the more attrac- 
tive males succeed in leaving a larger number of 
offspring to inherit their superiority in ornaments or 
other charms than the less attractive males ; but I 
have shewn that this would probably follow from the 
females, — especially the more vigorous ones, which 
would be the first to breed, — preferring not only the 
more attractive but at the same time the more vigorous 
and victorious males. 

Although we havb some positive evidence that birds 
appreciate bright and beautiful objects, as with the 
bower-birds of Australia, and although they certainly 
appreciate the power of song, yet I fully admit that it 
is astonishing that the females of many birds and some 


942 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III. 


mammals should he endowed with sufficient taste to 
appreciate ornaments, which we have reason to attribute 
to sexual selection ; and this is even more astonishing 
in the case of reptiles, fish, and insects. But we 
really know little about the minds of the lower animals. 
It cannot he supposed, for instance, that male birds of 
paradise or peacocks should take such pains in erecting, 
spreading, and vibrating their beautiful plumes before 
the females for no purpose. We should remember the 
fact given on excellent authority in a former chapter, 
that several peahens, when debarred from an admired 
male, remained widows during a whole season rather 
than pair with another bird. 

Nevertheless I know of no fact in natural history more 
wonderful than that the female Argus pheasant should 
appreciate the exquisite shading of the ball-and-socket 
ornaments and the elegant patterns on the wing- 
feathers of the male. He who thinks that the male 
was created as he now exists must admit that the great 
plumes, which prevent the wings from being used for 
flight, and which are displayed during courtship and at 
no other time in a manner quite peculiar to this one 
species, were given to him as an ornament. If so, he 
must likewise admit that the female was created and 
endowed with the capacity of appreciating such orna- 
ments. I differ only in the conviction that the male 
Argus pheasant acquired his beauty gradually, through 
the preference of the females during many generations 
for the more highly ornamented males ; the aesthetic 
capacity of the females having been advanced through 
exercise or habit, just as our own taste is gradually 
improved. In the male through the fortunate chance 
of a few feathers being left unchanged, we can dis- 


Chap. XXL 


GENERAL SUMMARY. 


943 


tinctly trace how simple spots with a little fulvous 
shading on one side may have been developed by small 
steps into the wonderful ball-and-socket ornaments ; 
and it is probable that they were actually thus de- 
veloped. 

Everyone who admits the principle of evolution, 
and yet feels great difficulty in admitting that female 
mammals, birds, reptiles, and fish, could have acquired 
the high taste implied by the beauty of the males, and 
which generally coincides with our own standard, should 
reflect that the nerve- cells of the brain in the highest 
as well as in the lowest members of the Vertebrate 
series, are derived from those of the common progenitor 
of this great Kingdom. For we can thus see how it 
has come to pass that certain mental faculties, in 
various and widely distinct groups of animals, have 
been developed in nearly the same manner and to 
nearly the same degree. 

The reader who has taken the trouble to go through 
the several chapters devoted to sexual selection, will 
be able to judge how far the conclusions at which I 
have arrived are supported by sufficient evidence. If 
he accepts these conclusions he may, I think, safely 
extend them to mankind ; but it would be superfluous 
here to repeat what I have so lately said on the 
manner in which sexual selection apparently has acted 
on man, both on the male and female side, causing the 
two sexes to differ in body and mind, and the several 
races to differ from each other in various characters, 
as well as from their ancient and lowly-organised 
progenitors. 

He who admits the principle of sexual selection 
will be led to the remarkable conclusion that the 


944 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part III 


nervous system not only regulates most of the existing 
functions of the body, but has indirectly influenced 
the progressive development of various bodily struc- 
tures and of certain mental qualities. Courage, 
pugnacity, perseverance, strength and size of body, 
weapons of all kinds, musical organs, both vocal and 
instrumental, bright colours and ornamental appen- 
dages, have all been indirectly gained by the one sex 
or the other, through the exertion of choice, the 
influence of love and jealousy, and the appreciation 
of the beautiful in sound, colour or form; and these 
powers of the mind manifestly depend on the develop- 
ment of the brain. 

Man scans with scrupulous care the character and 
pedigree of his horses, cattle, and dogs before he 
matches them ; but when he comes to his own 
marriage he rarely, or never, takes any such care. 
He is impelled by nearly the same motives as the 
lower animals, when they are left to their own free 
choice, though he is in so far superior to them that 
he highly values mental charms and virtues. On the 
other hand he is strongly attracted by mere wealth 
or rank. Yet he might by selection do something 
not only for the bodily constitution and frame of his 
offspring, but for their intellectual and moral qualities. 
Both sexes ought to refrain from marriage if they 
are in any marked degree inferior in body or mind ; 
but such hopes are Utopian and will never be even 
partially realised until the laws of inheritance are 
thoroughly known. Everyone does good service, who 
aids towards this end. When the principles of breed- 
ing and inheritance are better understood, we shall 


Chap. XXI. 


GENERAL SUMMARY. 


945 


not hear ignorant members of our legislature rejecting 
with scorn a plan for ascertaining whether or not 
consanguineous marriages are injurious to man. 

The advancement of the welfare of mankind is a 
most intricate problem : all ought to refrain from 
marriage who cannot avoid abject poverty for their 
children; for poverty is not only a great evil, but 
tends to its own increase by leading to recklessness 
in marriage. On the other hand, as Mr. Galton has 
remarked, if the prudent avoid marriage, whilst the 
reckless marry, the inferior members tend to supplant 
the better members of society. Man, like every other 
animal, has no doubt advanced to his present high 
condition through a struggle for existence consequent 
on his rapid multiplication; and if he is to advance 
still higher, it is to be feared that he must remain 
subject to a severe struggle. Otherwise he would 
sink into indolence, and the more gifted men would 
not be more successful in the battle of life than the 
less gifted. Hence our natural rate of increase, 
though leading to many and obvious evils, must not 
be greatly diminished by any means. There should 
be open competition for all men ; and the most able 
should not be prevented by laws or customs from 
succeeding best and rearing the largest number of 
offspring. Important as the struggle for existence 
has been and even still is, yet as far as the highest 
part of man’s nature is concerned there are other 
agencies more important. For the moral qualities 
are advanced, either directly or indirectly, much more 
through the effects of habit, the reasoning powers, in- 
struction, religion, &c., than through natural selection ; 
though to this latter agency may be safely attributed 

3 P 


946 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


Part Til. 


the social instincts, which aftbrded the basis for the 
development of the moral sense. 

The main conclusion arrived at in this work, namely 
that man is descended from some lowly organised 
form, will, I regret to think, be highly distasteful to 
many. But there can hardly be a doubt that we are 
descended from barbarians. The astonishment which 
I felt on first seeing a party of Fuegians on a wild 
and broken shore will never be forgotten by me, for 
the reflection at once rushed into my mind —such 
were our ancestors. These men were absolutely 
naked and bedaubed with paint, their long hair was 
tangled, their mouths frothed with excitement, and 
their expression was wild, startled, and distrustful. 
They possessed hardly any arts, and like wild animals 
lived on what they could catch ; they had no govern- 
ment, and were merciless to every one not of their 
own small tribe. He who has seen a savage in his 
native land will not feel much shame, if forced to 
acknowledge that the blood of some more humble 
creature flows in his veins. For my own part I would 
as soon be descended from that heroic little monkey, 
who braved his dreaded enemy in order to save the 
life of his keeper, or from that old baboon, who de- 
scending from the mountains, carried away in triumph 
his young comrade from a crowd of astonished dogs — 
as from a savage who delights to torture his enemies, 
offers up bloody sacrifices, practises infanticide without 
remorse, treats his wives like slaves, knows no decency, 
and is haunted by the grossest superstitions. 

Man may be excused for feeling some pride at 
having risen, though not through his own exertions, 


Chap XXI. 


GENEKAT. SUMMARY. 


947 


to the very summit of the organic scale ; and the fact of 
his having thus risen, instead of having been aborigi- 
nally placed there, may give him hope for a still higher 
destiny in the distant future. But we are not here 
concerned with hopes or fears, only with the truth 
as far as our reason permits us to discover it ; and 
I have given the evidence to the best of my ability. 
We must, however, acknowledge, as it seems to me, that 
man with all his noble qualities, with sympathy which 
feels for the most debased, with benevolence which 
extends not only to other men but to the humblest 
living creature, with his god-like intellect which has 
penetrated into the movements and constitution of the 
solar system — with all these exalted powers — Man 
still bears in his bodily frame the indelible stamp of 
his lowly origin. 


948 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE 


ON 

SEXUAL SELECTION IN KELATION TO MONKEYS. 
{Beprinted from Nature, November 2, 1876, p. 18.) 


In the discussion on Sexual Selection in my ‘ Descent 
of Man,’ no case interested and perplexed me so much 
as the brightly-coloured hinder ends and adjoining 
parts of certain monkeys. As these parts are more 
brightly coloured in one sex than the other, and as 
they become more brilliant during the season of love, 
I concluded that the colours had been gained as a 
sexual attraction. I was well aware that I thus laid 
myself open to ridicule ; though in fact it is not more 
surprising that a monkey should display his bright- 
red hinder end than that a peacock should display 
his magnificent tail. I had, however, at that time 
no evidence of monkeys exhibiting this part of their 
bodies during their courtship ; and such display in the 
case of birds afibrds the best evidence that the orna- 
ments of the males are of service to them by attracting 
or exciting the females. I have lately read an article 
by Job. von Fischer, of Gotha, published in ‘ Der 
Zoologische Garten,’ April 1876, on the expression of 


SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE. 


949 


monkeys under various emotions, which is well worthy 
of study by any one interested in the subject, and 
which shows that the author is a careful and acute 
observer. In this article there is an account of the 
behaviour of a young male mandrill when he first 
beheld himself in a looking-glass, and it is added, that 
after a time he turned round and presented his red 
hinder end to the glass. Accordingly I wrote to Herr 
J. von Fischer to ask what he supposed was the 
meaning of this strange action, and he has sent me 
two long letters full of new and curious details, which 
will, I hope, be hereafter published. He says that he 
was himself at first perplexed by the above action, and 
was thus led carefully to observe several individuals 
of various other species of monkeys, which he has long 
kept in his house. He finds that not only the mandrill 
{Cynocephalus mormon) but the drill ((7. leucojphseus) 
and three other kinds of baboons {G. liamadryaSy 
sphinx, and habouin), also Cynopithecus niger, and 
Macacus rhesus and nemestrinus, turn this part of their 
bodies, which in all these species is more or less 
brightly coloured, to him when they are pleased, and 
to other persons as a sort of greeting. He took pains 
to cure a Macacus rhesus, which he had kept for five 
years, of this indecorous habit, and at last succeeded. 
These monkeys are particularly apt to act in this 
manner, grinning at the same time, when first in- 
troduced to a new monkey, but often also to their 
old monkey friends ; and after this mutual display 
they begin to play together. The young mandrill 
ceased spontaneously after a time to act in this 
manner towards his master. Yon Fischer, but con- 
tinued to do so towards persons who were strangers 


950 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


and to new monkeys. A young Cynopithecus niger 
never acted, excepting on one occasion, in this way 
towards his master, but frequently towards strangers, 
and continues to do so up to the present time. From 
these facts Yon Fischer concludes that the monkeys 
which behaved in this manner before a looking-glass 
,(viz. the mandril], drill, Cynopithecus niger, Macacus 
rhesus and nemestrinus) acted as if their reflection were 
a new acquaintance. The mandrill and drill, which 
have their hinder ends especially ornamented, display 
it even whilst quite young, more frequently and more 
ostentatiously than do the other kinds. Next in order 
comes Gijnocephalus hamaclryas, whilst the other species 
act in this manner seldomer. The individuals, how- 
ever, of the same species vary in this respect, and 
some which were very shy never displayed their 
hinder ends. It deserves especial attention that Von 
Fischer has never, seen any species purposely exhibit 
the hinder part of its body, if not at all coloured. 
This remark applies to many individuals of Macacus 
cynomolgus and Gercocehus radiatus (which is closely 
allied to M. rhesus), to three specks of Cercopithecus 
and several American monkeys. The habit of turning 
the hinder ends as a greeting to an old friend or new 
acquaintance, which seems to us so odd, is not really 
more so than the habits of many savages, for instance 
that of rubbing their bellies with their hands, or 
rubbing noses together. The habit with the mandrill 
and drill seems to be instinctive or inherited, as it was 
followed by very young animals ; but it is modified or 
guided, like so many other instincts, by observation, 
for Yon Fischer says that they take pains to make 
their display fully ; and if made before two observers, 


SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE. 


951 


they turn to him who seems to pay the most atten- 
tion. 

With respect to the origin of the habit, Von Fischer 
remarks that his monkeys like to have their naked 
hinder ends patted or stroked, and that they then grunt 
with pleasure. They often also turn this part of their 
bodies to other monkeys to have bits of dirt picked off, 
and so no doubt it would be with respect to thorns. 
But the habit with adult animals is connected to a 
certain extent with sexual feelings, for Von Fischer 
watched through a glass door a female Ctjnopiihecus 
niger^ and she during several days, “ umdrehte und 
dem Mannchen mit gurgelnden Tonen die stark gero- 
thete Sitzflache zeigte, was ich friiher nie an diesem 
Thier bemerkt hatte. Beim Anblick dieses Gegen- 
standes erregte sich das Mannchen sichtlich, denn es 
polterte heftig an den Staben, ebenfalls gurgelnde 
Laute ausstossend.” As all the monkeys which have 
the hinder parts of their bodies more or less brightly 
coloured live, according to Von Fischer, in open rocky 
places, he thinks that these colours serve to render 
one sex conspicuous at a distance to the other ; but, as 
monkeys are such gregarious animals, I should have 
thought that there was no need fcr the sexes to re- 
cognise each other at a distance. It seems to me more 
probable that the bright colours, whether on the face 
or hinder end, or, as in the mandrill, on both, serve 
as a sexual ornament and attraction. Anyhow, as we 
now know that monkeys have the habit of turning 
their hinder ends towards other monkeys, it ceases to 
be at all surprising that it should have been this part 
of their bodies wdiich has been more or less decorated. 
The fact that it is only the monkeys thus characterised 


952 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


which, as far as at present known, act in this manner 
as a greeting towards other monkeys renders it doubt- 
ful whether the habit was first acquired from some 
independent cause, and that afterwards the parts in 
question were coloured as a sexual ornament ; or 
whether the colouring and the habit of turning round 
were first acquired through variation and sexual 
selection, and that afterwards the habit was retained 
as a sign of pleasure or as a greeting, through the 
principle of inherited association. This principle 
apparently comes into play on many occasions : thus 
it is generally admitted that the songs of birds serve 
mainly as an attraction during the season of love, and 
that the lehsy or great congregations of the black- 
grouse, are connected with their courtship; but the 
habit of singing has been retained by some birds when 
they feel happy, for instance by the common robin, 
and the habit of congregating has been retained by 
the black-grouse during other seasons of the year. 

I beg leave to refer to one other point in relation 
to sexual selection. It has been objected that this 
form of selection, as far as the ornaments of the males 
are concerned, implies that all the females within the 
same district must possess and exercise exactly the 
same taste. It should, however, be observed, in the 
first place, that although the range of variation of a 
species may be very large, it is by no means indefinite. 
I have elsewhere given a good instance of this fact in 
the pigeon, of which there are at least a hundred 
varieties differing widely in their colours, and at least 
a score of varieties of the fowl differing in the same 
kind of way ; but the range of colour in these two 
species is extremely distinct. Therefore the females of 


SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE. 


953 


natural species cannot have an unlimited scope for 
their taste. In the second place, I presume that no 
supporter of the principle of sexual selection believes 
that the females select particular points of beauty 
in the males ; they are merely excited or attracted in 
a greater degree by one male than by another, and 
this seems often to depend, especially with birds, on 
brilliant colouring. Even man, excepting perhaps an 
artist, does not analyse the slight differences in the 
features of the woman whom he may admire, on which 
her beauty depends. The male mandrill has not only 
the hinder end of his body, but his face gorgeously 
coloured and marked with oblique ridges, a yellow 
beard, and other ornaments. We may infer from what 
we see of the variation of animals under domestication, 
that the above several ornaments of the mandrill were 
gradually acquired by one individual varying a little 
in one way, and another individual in another way. 
The males which were the handsomest or the most 
attractive in any manner to the females would pair 
oftenest, and would leave rather more offspring than 
other males. The offspring of the former, although 
variously intercrossed, would either inherit the pecu- 
liarities of their fathers or transmit ah increased 
tendency to vary in the same manner. Consequently 
the whole body of males inhabiting the same country 
would tend from the effects of constant intercrossing 
to become modified almost uniformly, but sometimes a 
little more in one character and sometimes in another, 
though at an extremely slow rate ; all ultimately 
being thus rendered more attractive to the females. 
The process is like that which I have called uncon- 
scious selection by man, and of which I have given 


954 


THE DESCENT OF MAN. 


several instances. In one country the inhabitants 
value a fleet or light dog or horse, and in another 
country a heavier and more powerful one; in neither 
country is there any selection of individual animals 
with lighter or stronger bodies and limbs ; neverthe- 
less after a considerable lapse of time the individuals 
are found to have been modified in the desired manner 
almost uniformly, though differently in each country. 
In two absolutely distinct countries inhabited by 
the same species, the individuals of which can never 
during long ages have intermigrated and intercrossed, 
and where, moreover, the variations will probably not 
have been identically the same, sexual selection might 
cause the males to differ. Nor does the belief appear 
to me altogether fanciful that two sets of females, 
surrounded by a very different environment, would be 
apt to acquire somewhat different tastes with respect 
to form, sound, or colour. However this may be, I 
have given in my ‘ Descent of Man ’ instances of 
closely-allied birds inhabiting distinct countries, of 
which the young and the females cannot be distin- 
guished, whilst the adult males differ considerably, 
and this may be attributed with much probability to 
the action of sexual selection. 


( 955 ) 


I N I) E X. 


ABBOTT. 


A. 

Al)l)ot, C., on the battles of seals, 
764 

Abductor of the fifth metatarsal, 
})resence of, in man, 62 
Aljercrombie, Dr., on disease of the 
brain affecting speech, 135 
Abipoues, marriage customs of the, 
912 

Al)ortion, prevalence of the practice 
of, 69 

Abou-Simbel, caves of, 261 
Abramis brama, 385 
Abstraction, power of, in animals, 
126 

Acalleii, stridulation of, 468 
Acanthoiadylvs aq^ensis, sexual 
differences of colour in, 547 
^Iccnifor Modularis, 723 
Acclimatisation, diflerence of, in 
diflerent races of men, 260 
Achetidae, stridulation of the, 434, 
435, 438 ; rudimentary stridulat- 
ing organs in female, 442 
Aciliiis sulcalus, elytra of the fe- | 
male, 424 

Acomus, development of spurs in 
the female of, 685 
Acridiidte, stridulation of the, 434, 
439 ; rudimentary stridulating 
organs in female, 442 
Acromio-basilar muscle, and epaad- 
rupetal gait, 62 
Acting, 276 

Adinice, bright colours of, 401 
Adams, Mr., migration of birds, 
165 ; intelligence of nut-hatch, 
625 ; on the Bombycilla caro- 
linensis, 703 
Admiml butterfly, 478 


AGASSTZ. 


Adoption of the young of other 
animals by female monkeys, 106 
Advancement in the organic scale. 
Von Baer's definition of, 253 
Aeby, on the difference between the 
skulls of man and the quadru- 
mana, 231 

iEsthetic faculty, not highly deve- 
loped in savages, 142 
Affection, inaternal, 106 ; mani- 
festation of, by animals, 106 ; 
parental and filial, partly the 
result of natural selection, 161 ; 
mutual, of birds ; 626 ; shewn by 
birds in confinement, for certain 
persons, 627 

Africa, probably the birthplace of 
man, 240 ; South, crossed popu- 
lation of, 269 ; South, retention 
of colour by the Dutch in, 299 ; 
South, proportion of the sexes in 
the butterflies of, 386 ; tattooing 
practised in, 874 ; Northern, 
coiffure of natives of, 875 
Agassiz, L., on conscience in dogs, 
158 ; on the coincidence of the 
1 aces of man with zoological pro- 
vinces, 262 ; on the number of 
species of man, 270 ; on the 
courtship of the land-snails, 404 ; 
on the brightness of the colours 
of male fishes during the breeding 
season, 520 ; on the frontal pro- 
tuberance of the males of Geo- 
pliagus Qxidi Cichla, 520, 529; male 
■ fishes hatching ova in their mouths, 
529 ; sexual differences in colour 
of chromids, 529 ; on the slight 
sexual differences of the South 
Americans, 854 ; on the tattooing 
of the Amazonian Indians, 878 


956 


AOE. 


INDEX. 


ANIMALS. 


Age, in relation to the transmission 
of characters in birds, 707 ; varia- 
tion in accordance -with, in birds, 
738 

Agelceics phoeniceus, 347, 634 
Aqeronia feronia^ noise i)rodnccd 
'by, 411 

Agrion^ dimorphism in, 445, 446 
Agrion Ramhiirii, sexes of, 445 
'Agrionidse, difference in the sexes 
of, 445 

Agrotis exclamationis, 484 
Ague, tertian, dog suffering from, 10 
Ainos, hairiness of the, 852 
Aitchison, Mr., on sheep, 380 
A Wmrus polytmus, young of, 743 
Albino birds, 639 
AJca torda, young of, 741 
Alces pahnata, 786 
Alder and Hancock, MM., on the 
nudi-branch mollusca, 106 
Allen, J. A., vigour of birds earliest 
hatched, 327, 329 ; effect of dif- 
ference of temperature, light, &c., 
on birds, 347 ; colours of birds, 
644 ; on the relative size of the 
sexes of Callorhinus ursinus, 
787 ; on the name of Otaria ju- 
bata, 795 ; on the pairing of 
seals, 797 ; on sexual differences 
in the colour of bats, 815 

S., on the habits of Hoplo- 

plerus, 560 ; on the plumes of 
herons, 596 ; on the vernal 
moult of Ilerodius bubulcus^ 598. 
Alligator, courtship of the male, 
311, 537 ; roaring of the male, 
863 

Amadavat, pugnacity of male, 560 
Amadina Latham, i, display of 
plumage by the male, 611 

castanotis, display of plumage 

by the male, 611 

Amazons, butterflies of the, 386 ; 
fishes of the, 525 

America, variation in the skulls of 
aborigines of, 38 ; wide range of 
aborigines of, 262 ; lice of the 
natives of, 263 ; general beard- 
lessness of the natives of, 853 

, North, butterflies of, 386 ; 

Indians of, women a cause of 
strife among the, 855 ; Indians 


of, their notions of female beauty, 
880, 884 

American, South, character of the 
natives of, 260 ; population of 
parts of, 268 ; piles of stones in, 
277 ; extinction of the fossil 
horse of, 297 ; desert-birds of, 
747 ; slight sexual difference of 
the aborigines of, 854 ; prevalence 
of infanticide in, 902 
American languages, often highly 
artificial, 139 

Amei icans, wide geographical range 
of, 43 ; native, variability of, 
269 ; and negroes, difference of, 
305 ; aversion of, to hair on the 
face, 884 

AmTnophila, on the jaws of, 423 
Amraotragus tragelaphus, hairy 
foreleg of, 810, 814 
Amphibia, affinity of, to the ganoid 
fishes, 245 ; vocal organs of the, 863 - 
Amphibians, 255, 532 ; breeding 
whilst immature, 739 
Amphioxus, 246 

Amphipoda, males sexually mature 
while young, 740 

Amunoph III., negro character of, 
features of, 261 

Anal appendages of insects, 425 
Analogous variation in the plumage 
of birds, 589 
Anas, 704 

acuta, male plumage of, 599 

hoschas, male plumage of, 598. 

histrionica, 739 

punctata, 572 

Anastomus oscitans, sexes and young 
of, 741 ; white nuptial plumage 
of, 751 

Anatidse, voices of, 572 
Anax junius, differences in the 
sexes of, 445 

Andaman islanders, susceptilde to 
change of climate, 291 
Anderson, Dr., on the tail of 
Macacus brunneus, 88 ; the Bufo 
sikimmensis, 535 ; sounds of EcMs 
carinata, 541 
Andrcena fulva, 449 
Anglo-Saxons, estimation of the 
beard among the, 885 
Animals, domesticated, more fertile 


ANNELIDA. 


INDEX. 


AQUILA. 


957 


than wild, 67 ; cruelty of savages 
to, 180 ; characters common to 
man and, 225 ; domestic, change 
of breeds of, 909 
Annelida, 407 ; colours of, 407 
Anobium tessellatum, sounds pro- 
duced by, 469 

Anolis cristMellus, male, crest of, 
542 ; pugnacity of the male, 542 ; 
throat-pouch of, 543 
A 71367' caTiadensis, 635 

cygnoideSf 632 ; knob at the 

base of the beak of, 650 

hyperboreuSy whiteness of, 751 

Antelope, prong-horned, horns of, 
362 

Antelopes, generally polygamous, 
335 ; horns of, 362, 770 ; canine 
teeth of some male, 766 ; use of 
liorns of, 777 ; dorsal crests in, 
810 ; dewlaps of, 811 ; winter 
change of two species of, 828 ; 
peculiar markings of, 829 
Antennae, furnished with cushions 
ill the male of Penthe, 425 
Anthidium manicatum, large male 
of, 429 

A7ithocharis cardamiTies^ 473, 478, 
479 ; sexual difference of colour 
in, 494 

genutia, 479 

Sara, 479 

Anthophora acervorum, large male 
of, 429 

retma, difference of the sexes 

ill, 449 

Anthropidae, 235 
A ntJiTJbs, moulting of, 597 
Antics of birds, 580 
Antigua, Dr. Nicholson’s observa- 
tions on yellow fever in, 302 
Antilocapra americana, horns of, 
362, 770, 774 

Antilope hezoartica, horned females 
of, 770, 773, 774 ; sexual differ- 
ence in the colour of, 817 

Dorcas and euchore, 770 

Antilope euchoi'e, horns of, 777 

monta7ia, rudimentary canines 

in the young male of, 785 

niger, sing-sing, caama, and 

gorgon, sexual differences in the 
colours of 818 


A7itilope oreas, horns of, 362 

saiga, polygamous habits of, 

335 

strepsiceros, horns of, 362 

suhgutturosa, absence of sub- 
orbital pits in, 808 
Antipathy, shewn by birds in con- 
finement, to certain persons, 627 
Ants, 227 ; large size of the cere- 
bral ganglia in, 81 ; soldier, 
large jaws of, 94 ; playing to- 
gether, 104 ; memory in, 112 ; 
intercommunication of, by means 
of the antennae, 136 ; habits of, 
227 ; difference of the sexes in, 

448 ; recognition of each other 
by, after separation, 448 

White, habits of, 447 

Anura, 534 

Apatania muliebris, male unknown, 
391 

Apathus, difference of the sexes in, 

449 

Apatura Iris, 471, 473 
Apes, difference of the young, from 
the adult, 11 ; semi-erect attitude 
of some, 78 ; mastoid processes 
of, 79 ; influences of the jaw- 
muscles on the physiognomy of, 
80 ; female, destitute of large 
canines, 96 ; building platfonns, 
126 ; imitative faculties of, 198 ; 
anthropomorphous, 237 ; pro- 
bable speedy extermination of 
the, 240 ; Cratiolet on the evolu- 
tion of, 274 ; canine teeth of 
male, 766 ; females of some, less 
hairy beneath than the males, 
917 

long-armed, their mode of pro- 
gression, 78 

Aphasia, Dr. Bateman on, 135 
Apis mellifica, large male of, 429 
Apollo, Greek statues of, 886 
Apoplexy in Cehus Azarce, 9 
Appendages, anal, of insects, 425 
Approbation, influence of the love 
of, 167, 178, 201 
Aprosmictus scapulatus, 697 
Apus, proportion of sexes, 392 
Aquatic birds, frequency of white 
plumage in, 752 
Aquila chrysaetos, 622 


958 


ARAB. 


INDEX. 


AUDUBON. 


Arab women, elaborate and i)eculiar 
coiffure of, 889 

Arabs, fertility of crosses with 
other races, 265 ; gashing of 
clieeks and temples among the, 
87.5 

Arachnida, 417 

Arakhan, artificial widening of the 
forehead by the natives of, 888 
Arhoricola, young of, 714 
Archcopteryx, 245 
Arctiidse, coloration of the, 481 
Ardea asha, rufescens, and ccei'ulea, 
change of colour in, 753, 754, 755 

ccerulea, breeding in immature 

plumage, 739 

gularis, change of plumage in, 

754 

herodias, love-gestures of the 

male, 580 

ludoviciana, age of mature 

plumage in, 738 ; continued 
growth of crest and plumes in 
the male of, 740 

nycticorax, cries of, 563 

Ardeola, young of, 715 
Ardetta, changes of plumage in, 702 
Argenteuil, 32 

Argns pheasant, 585, 613, 705 ; 
display of plumage by the male, 
605 ; ocellated spots of the, 654 ; 
gradation of characters in the, 
662 

Argyll, Duke of, oii the physical 
Aveakness of man, 95 ; the 
fashioning of implements pecu- 
liar to man, 125 ; on the contest 
in man between right and wrong, 
191 ; on the primitive civilisa- 
tion of man, 221 ; on the plumage 
of the male Argus pheasant, 607 ; 
on Urosticte Bejijamini, 674 ; on 
the nests of birds, 690 
Argynnis, colouring of the lower 
surface of, 482 

Aricoris epiius, sexual difi'eieiices 
in the wings of, 426 
Aristocracy, iiicreased beauty of 
tlie, 894 

Amis, proportions of, in soldiers 
and sailors, 48 ; direction of tlie 
hair on the, 233 

and hands, free use of, indi- 


rectly correlated with diminution 
of canines, 80 

Arrest of development, 52, 53 
Arrow-heads, stone, general resem- 
blance of, 277 
Arrows, use of, 277 
Arteries, variations in the course 
of the, 39 

Artery, effect of tying, upon the 
lateral channels, 47 
Arthropoda, 408 
Arts practised by savages, 277 
Ascension, coloured incrustation on 
the rocks of, 406 

Ascidia, affinity of the laucelet to, 
246 ; tad-pole like larvte of, 246 
Ascidians, 403 ; bright colours of 
some, 401 

Asinus, Asiatic and African species 
of, 837 

tceniopus, 837 

Ass, colour- variations of the, 835 
Atelea, effects of brandy on an, 10 ; 
absence of the thumb in, 76 

hcelzcbuth, ears of, 21 

marginatus, colour of the ruff 

of, 820 ; hair on the head of, 838 
Ateuchus cicatricosus, habits of, 460 
Ateuchus, stridulation of, 468 
AUtalia, proportions of the sexes 
in, 391 

Atropus pulsatorius, 447 
Attention, manifestations of, in 
animals, 111 

Audouiu, A''., on a hymenopterous 
parasite with a sedentary male, 
342 

Audubon, J. J., on the pinioned 
goose, 160 ; on the speculum of 
Mergas cucullatus, 365 ; on the 
})ugnacity of male birds, 554, 
560 ; on courtship of Capriniul- 
gus, 561 ; on Tetrao cupido, 562 ; 
on Ardea nycticorax, 563 ; on 
Stu7'nelia ludoviciaiia, 562; on 
f he vocal organs of Tetrao cupido, 
568 ; on the drumming of the 
male Tetrao U7nbellus, 574 ; on 
sounds produced by the niglitjar, 
574, 575 ; on Ai’dea Jtei'odias and 
Cathartes jota, 580, 581 ; on 
Minius polyglottus, 627 ; on dis- 
j»lay in male birds, 601 ; on the 


AVI)UBON. 


INDEX. 


BAIBLY. 


959 


spring change of colour in some 
finches, 600 ; on migration of 
mocking thrushes, 627 ; recogni- 
tion of a dog by a turkey, 628 ; 
selection of mate by female birds, 
634 ; on the turkey, 628, 638 ; 
on variation in the male scarlet 
tanager, 646 ; on the musk -rat, 
827 ; on the habits of Pyranga 
cestiva, 690 ; on local differences 
in the nests of the same species 
of birds, 695 ; on the habits of 
woodpeckers, 698 ; on Bombycillo, 
carolinensis, 704 ; on young 
females of Pyranga cestiva ac- 
quiring male characters, 704 ; 
on the immature plumage of 
thrushes, 709 ; on the immature 
plumage of birds, 709 et seq. ; 
on birds breeding in immature 
plumage, 739 ; on the gi’owth of 
the crest and plume in the male 
Ardca liidoviciana, 740 ; on the 
change of colour in some species 
of Ardea, 754 

Audubon and Bachman, MM., on 
squirrels fighting. 763 ; on the 
Canadian lynx, 795 
Aughey, Prof., on rattlesnakes, 541 
Austen. N. L., on Anolis cristatd- 
his, 542 

Australia, not the birthplace of 
man, 240 ; half-castes killed by 
the natives of, 264 ; lice of the 
natives of, 263 

Australia, South, variation in the 
skulls of aborigines of, 38 
Australians, colour of new-born chil- 
dren of, 848 ; relative height of 
the sexes of, 851 ; women a cause 
of war among the, 854 
Axis deer, sexual difference in the 
colour of the, 819 

Aymaras, measurements of the, 51 ; 
no grey hair among the, 851 ; 
hairlessness of the face in the, 
853 ; long hair of the, 884 
Azara, on the projtortion of men and 
women among t lie Cuaranys, 377 ; 
on Palamedea cornuta, 558 ; on 
the beards of the Guaranys, 853 ; 
on strife for women among the 
Guanas, 855 ; on infanticide, I 


880, 902 ; on the eradication of 
the eyebrows and eyelashes by 
the Indians of Paraguay, 884 ; 
on polyandry among the Guanas, 
904 ; celibacy unknown among 
the savages of South America, 
906 ; on the freedom of divorce 
among the Charruas, 912 


B. 

Babbage, C., on the greater propor- 
tion of illegitimate female births, 
377 

Babirusa, tusks of the, 791 

Baboon, revenge in a, 105 ; rage 
excited in, by reading, 108 ; 
manifestation of memory by a, 
112 ; employing a mat for shelter 
against the sun, 126 ; protected 
from punishment by its com- 
panions, 157 

, Cape, mane of the male, 795 ; 

Hamadryas, mane of the male, 
795 

Baboon, effects of intoxicating 
liquors on, 10 ; ears of, 22 ; 
diversity of the mental faculties 
in, 40; hands of, 75 ; habits of, 
76 ; variability of tlie tail in, 
87 ; manifestation of maternal 
affection by, 106 ; using stones 
and sticks as weapons, 124 ; co- 
operation of, 154 ; silence of, on 
plundering expeditions, 159 ; ap- 
parent polygamy of, 335 ; poly- 
gamous and social habits of, 394 

Baboons, couitship of, 949 

Bachman, Dr., on the fertility of 
mulattoes, 264 

Baer, K. E. von, on embryonic 
development, 12 definition of 
advancement in the organic scale, 
253 

Bagehot, W., on the social virtues 
among primitive men, 179 ; 
slavery formerly beneficial, 180 ; 
on the value of obedience, 200 ; 
on human jn-ogress, 204 ; on the 
pei-sistence of savage tribes in 
classical times, 284 
I Bailly, E, M., on the mode of light- 


960 


BAIN. 


INDEX. 


BATES. 


ing of the Italian buffalo, 776 ; 
on the fighting of stags, 779 
Bain, A. , on the sense of duty, 149 ; 
aid springing from sympathy, 
157 ; on the basis of sympathy, 
162 ; on the love of approbation, 
&c,, 167 ; on the idea of beauty, 
890 

Baird, W., on a difference in colour 
between the males and females of 
some Entozoa, 400 
Baker, Mr., observation on the pro- 
portion of the sexes in pheasant- 
chicks, 382 

, Sir S., on the fondness of the 

Arabs for discordant music, 580 ; 
on sexual difference in the colours 
of an antelope, 818 ; on the 
elephant and rhinoceros attacking 
white or grey horses, 824 ; on 
the disfigurements practised by 
the negi’oes, 825 ; on the gashing 
of the cheeks and temples prac- 
tised in Arab countries, 875 ; on 
the coiffure of the North Africans, 
875, 876 ; on the perforation of 
the lower lip by the women of 
Latooka, 877 ; on the distinctive 
characters of the coiffure of cen- 
tral African tribes, 878 : on the 
coiffure of Arab women, 889 
“ Balz ” of the Black-cock, 556, 617 
Bantam, Sebright, 326, 368 
Banteng, horns of, 771 ; sexual 
differences in the colours of the, 
818 

Banyai, colour of the, 882 
Barbarism, primitive, of civilised 
nations, 221 

Barbs, filamentous, of the feathers, 
in certain birds, 587, 656 
Barr, Mr., on sexual preference in 
dogs, 800 

Barrago, F., on the Simian resem- 
blances of man, 4 

Barrington, Dailies, on the language 
of birds, 131 ; on the clucking 
of the hen, 563 ; on the object of 
the song of birds, 564 ; on the 
singing of female birds, 566 ; on 
birds acquiring the songs of other 
birds, 567 ; on the muscles of the 
larynx in song-birds, 567 ; on the 


want of the power of song by 
female birds, 686 
Barrow, on the widow-bird, 614 
Bartels, Dr. , supernumerary mammae 
in men, 55 

Bartlett, A. D., period of hatching 
of bird’s eggs, 254 ; on the trago- 
pan, 339 ; on the development of 
the spurs in Crossoptilon auritum^^ 
364 ; on the fighting of the males* 
of Plectropterus gainhensis, 558 ; 
on the Knot, 596 ; on display in 
male birds, 601 ; on the display 
of plumage by the male Poly- 
plectron, 603, 604 ; on Crossoptilon 
auritum and Phasianus Wal- 
lichii, 609 ; on the habits of 
Lophophorus, 640 ; on the colour 
of the mouth in Baceros hicornis, 
649 ; on the incubation of the 
cassowary, 729 ; on the Cape 
Buffalo, 776 ; on the use of the 
horns of antelopes, 777 ; on the 
fighting of male wart-hogs, 794 ; 
on Ammotragus tragelaphus^ 810 ; 
on the colours of Gercopithecus 
cephus, 820 ; on the colours of 
the faces of monkeys, 840 ; on 
the naked surfaces of monkeys, 
916 

Bartlett, on courting of Argus 
pheasant, 607 

Bartram, on the courtship of the 
male alligator, 537 
Basque language, highly artificial, 
139 

Bate, C. S., on the superior activity 
of male Crustacea, 341 ; on the 
proportions of the sexes in crabs, 
392 ; on the chelae of Crustacea, 
410 ; on the relative size of the 
sexes in Crustacea, 411 ; on the 
colours of Crustacea, 416 
Bateman, Dr., tendency to imita- 
tion in certain diseased states, 
110 ; oil Aphasia, 135 
Bates, H. W., on variation in the 
form of the head of Amazonian 
Indians, 42 ; on the proportion 
of the sexes among Amazonian 
butterflies, 386 ; on sexual dif- 
ferences in the wings of butter- 
flies, 426 ; on the field-cricket. 


BAT0KA3. 


INDEX. 


BENEVOLENCE. 


961 


435 ; on Pyrodes pulcherrimus, 
452 ; on the horns of Lamellicorn 
beetles, 453, 455 ; on the colours 
of Epicalioe, &c., 473 ; on the 
coloration of tropical butterflies, 
476 ; on the variability of Papilio 
Sesostris and CEildrence, 490 ; on 
male and female butterflies 
inhabiting different stations, 492 ; 
on mimicry, 495 ; on the cater- 
pillar of a Sphinx, 499 ; on the 
vocal organs of the umbrella - 
bird, 570 ; on the toucans, 750 ; 
on Brachyurus calvus, 840 
Batokas,’ knocking out two upper 
incisors, 876 

Batrachia, 534 ; eagerness of male, 
341 

Bats, scent-glands, 807 ; sexual 
differences in the colour of, 815 ; 
fur of male frugivorous, 815 
Battle, law of, 222 ; among beetles, 
459 ; among birds, 551 ; among 
mammals, 763 et seq. ; in man, 
854 

Beak, sexual difference in the forms of 
the, 550 ; in the colour of the, 585 
Beaks, of birds, bright colours of, 
749 

Beard, development of, in man, 
843 ; analogy of the, in man and 
the quadmmana, 849 ; variation 
of the development of the, in 
different races of men, 850 ; 
estimation of, among bearded 
nations, 885 ; probable origin of 
the, 919 

, in monkeys, 232 ; of mam- 
mals, 811 

Beautifi.il, taste for the, in birds, 
626 ; in the quadmmana, 825 
Beauty, sense of, in animals, 141 ; 
appreciation of, by birds, 629 ; 
influence of, 873, 878 ; varia- 
bility of the standard of, 910 
, sense of, sufficiently per- 
manent for action of sexual 
selection, 755, 952 
Beaven, Lieut., on the development 
of the horns in Cervvs Eldi, 361 
Beaver, instinct and intelligence of 
the, 101, 104 ; voice of th^e, 805 ; 
castoreum of the, 807 


Beavers, battles of male, 763 
Bechstein, on female birds choosing 
the best singers among the males, 
564; on rivalry in song-birds, 
565 ; on the singing of female 
birds, 566 ; on birds acquiring 
the songs of other birds, 567 ; 
on pairing the canaiy and siskin, 
633 ; on a sub-variety of the 
monk pigeon, 632 ; on spurred 
hens, 685 

Beddoe, Dr., on causes of difference 
in stature, 46 
Bee -eater, 568 

Bees, 151 ; pollen-baskets and 
stings of, 94 ; destraction of 
drones and queens by, 161 ; 
female, secondary sexual charac- 
ters of, 320 ; proportion of sexes, 
391 ; difference of the sexes in 
colour and sexual selection, 448 
Beetle, luminous larva of a, 426 
Beetles, 451 ; size of the cerebral 
ganglia in, 81 ; dilatation of the 
fore tarsi in male, 424 ; blind, 
451 ; stridulation pf, 462 
Belgium, ancient inhabitants of, 
282 

Bell, Sir C., on emotional muscles 
in man, 5; “snarling muscles,” 
61 ; on the liand, 77 
, T. , on the numerical propor- 
tion of the sexes in moles, 381 ; 
on the newts, 533 ; on the croak- 
ing of the frog, 534 ; on the 
difference in the coloration of the 
sexes in Zootoca vivipara, 547 ; 
on moles fighting, 763 
Bell -bird, sexual difference in the 
colour of the, 592 
Bell-birds, colours of, 750 
Belt, Mr., on the nakedness of 
tropical mankind, 86 ; on a 
spider-monkey aud eagle, 155 ; 
habits of ants, 227 ; Lampridae 
distasteful to mammals, 426 ; 
mimicry of Leptalides, 498 ; 
colours of Nicaraguan frogs, 535 ; 
display of humming-birds, 675 ; 
on the toucans, 750 ; protective 
colouring of skunk, 829 
Benevolence, manifested by birds, 
627 

O 


962 


BENNETT. 


INDEX. 


BITTERNS. 


Bennett, A. W., attachment of 
mated birds, 626 ; on the habits 
of Dromceus irroratus, 730 

, Dr., on birds of paradise, 

603 

Berbers, fertility of crosses with 
other races, 265 

Bernicla antarctica, colours of, 
751 

Bernicle gander pairing with a 
Canada goose, 632 

Bert, M., crustaceans distinguish 
colours, 416 

Bettoni, E., on local diiferences in 
the nests of Italian birds, 695 

Beyle, M., see Bombet 

Bhoteas, colour of the beard in, 
850 

Bhringa, disc-formed tail-feathers 
of, 597 

Bianconi, Prof. , on structures as ex- 
plained through mechanical prin- 
ciples, 35 

Bibio, sexual differences in the 
genus, 430 

Bichat, on beauty, 891 

Bickes, proportion of sexes in man, 
375 

Bile, coloured, in many animals, 403 

Bimana, 230 

Birds, imitations of the songs of 
other birds by, 110 ; dreaming, 
113 ; killed by telegraph wires, 
122 ; language of, 131 ; sense of 
beauty in, 140 ; pleasure of, in 
incubation, 160 ; male, incubation 
by, 252 ; and reptiles, alliance 
of, 255 ; sexual differences in the 
beak of some, 321 ; migratory, 
arrival of the male before the 
female, 328 ; apparent relation 
between polygamy and marked 
sexual differences in, 337 ; mono- 
gamous, becoming polygamous 
under domestication, 339 ; eager- 
ness of male in pursuit of the 
female, 341 ; wild, numerical pro- 
portion of the sexes in, 381 ; 
secondary sexual characters of, 
549 ; difference of size in the 
sexes of, 554 ; fights of male, 
witnessed by females, 560 ; dis- 
play of male, to captivate the 


females, 561 ; close attention of, 
to the songs of others, 564 ; 
acquiring the song of their foster- 
parents, 567 ; brilliant, rarely 
good songsters, 568 ; love-antics 
and dances of, 580 ; coloration 
of, 589 et seq. ; moulting of, 
594, etseq. ; unpaired, 620; male, 
singing out of season, 624 ; 
mutual affection of, 626 ; in con- 
finement, distinguish persons, 
627 ; hybrid, production of, 631 ; 
Albino, 639 ; European, number 
of species of, 644 ; variability of, 
643 ; geographical distribution of 
colouring, 644 ; gradation of 
secondary sexual characters in, 
655 ; obscurely coloured, build- 
ing concealed nests, 691 ; young 
female, acquiring male characters, 
704 ; breeding in immature 
plumage, 739 ; moulting of, 738 ; 
aquatic, frequency of white 
plumage in, 752 ; vocal courtship 
of, 863 ; naked skin of the head 
and neck in, 917 
Birgus latro, habits of, 415 
Birkbeck, Mr., on the finding of 
new mates by golden eagles, 622 
Birthplace of man, 240 
Births, numerical proportions of the 
sexes in, in animals and man, 
331, 332 ; male and female, nu- 
merical proportion of, in England, 
374 

Bischoff, Prof., on the agreement 
between the brains of man and 
of the orang, 8 ; figure of the 
embryo of the dog, 14 ; on the 
convolutions of the brain in the 
human foetus, 13 ; on the differ- 
ence between the skulls of man 
and the quadruraana, 231 ; re- 
semblance between the ape’s and 
man’s, 309 

Bishop, J., on the vocal organs of 
frogs, 536 ; on the vocal organs 
of cervine birds, 567 ; on the 
trachea of the Merganser, 572 
Bison, American, co-operation of, 
154 ; mane of the male, 795 
Bitterns, dwarf, coloration of the 
sexes of, 702 


BIZIITRA. 


INDEX. 


BLYTH. 


963 


Biziura lobata^ musky odour of the 
male, 560 ; large size of male, 
654 

Blackbird, sexual differences in the, 
338 ; proportion of the sexes in 
the, 383 ; acquisition of a song 
by, 567 ; colour of the beak in 
the sexes of the, 585, 749 ; pair- 
ing with a thmsh, 631 ; colours 
and nidification of the, 693 ; 
young of the, 742, 743 ; sexual 
difference in coloration of the, 
749 

Black-buck, Indian, sexual differ- 
ence in the colour of the, 817 
Blackcap, arrival of the male, before 
the female, 327 ; young of the, 
742 

Black-cock, polygamous, 338 : pro- 
portion of the sexes in the, 382 ; 
pugnacity and love-dance of the, 
556 ; call of the, 573 ; moulting 
of the, 697 ; duration of the 
courtship of the, 617 ; and 
heasant, hybrids of, 631 ; sexual 
ifference in coloration of the, 
749 : crimson eye-cere of the, 749 
Black-grouse, characters of young, 
709, 719 

Blacklock, Dr., on music, 872 
Blackwall, J., on the speaking of 
the magpie, 137 ; on the deser- 
tion of their young by swallows, 
165 ; on the superior activity of 
male spiders, 341 ; on the pro- 
portion of the sexes in spiders, 
392 ; on sexual variation of colour 
in spiders, 418 ; on male spidem, 
418 

Bladder-nose Seal, hood of the, 806 
Blaine, on the affections of dogs, 
799 

Blair, Dr., on the relative liability 
of Europeans to yellow fever, 301 
Blake, C. C., on the jaw from La 
Naulette, 60 

Blakiston, Capt., on the American 
snipe, 577 ; on the dances of 
Tetrao phasianellus, 580 
Blasius, Dr., on the species of 
European birds, 644 
Blcdius taurus, hornlike processes 
of male, 458 


Bleeding, tendency to profuse, 366 
Blenkiron, Mr. , on sexual preference 
in horses, 800 

Blennies, crest developed on the 
head of male, during the breeding 
season, 518 

Blethisa muUipunctata^ stridulation 
of, 463 

Bloch, on the proportions of the 
sexes in fishes, 384 
Blood, arterial, red colour of, 402 

pheasant, number of spurs in, 

557 

Blow-fly, sounds made by, 431 
Bluebreast, red-throated, sexual 
differences of the, 720 
Blumenbach, on Man, 42 ; on the 
large size of the nasal cavities in 
American aborigines, 50 ; on the 
position of man, 230 ; on the 
number of species of man, 270 
Blyth, E., on the structure of the 
hand in the species of Hylohates^ 
77 ; observations on Indian crows, 
157 ; on the development of the 
horns in the Koodoo and Eland 
antelopes, 362 ; on the pugnacity 
of the males of Gallicrex cristatus, 
552 ; on the presence of spurs in 
the female Euplocamus erythroph- 
thalmus, 557 ; on the pugnacity 
of the amadavat, 560 ; on the 
spoonbill, 572 ; on the moulting 
of Anthus, 597 ; on the moulting 
of bustards, plovers, and Gallus 
hankiva^ 598 ; on the Indian 
honey-buzzard, 646 ; on sexual 
differences in the colour of the 
eyes of hornbills, 649 ; on Oriolus 
Tnelanocephalus, 702 ; on Palce- 
ornis javanicus, 703 ; on the 
genus ArdettUy 702 ; on the 
peregrine falcon, 704 ; on 
young female bu’ds acquiring 
male characters, 702 ; on the 
immature plumage of birds, 709 ; 
on representative species of birds, 
714 ; on the young of Turnix, 
727 ; on anomalous young of 
Lanius rufus and Colymhus 
glacialis, 736 ; on the sexes and 
young of the sparrows, 737 ; on 
dimorphism in some herons, 739 ; 


964 


BOAR. 


INDEX. 


BRACHYCEPHALIC. 


on the ascertainment of the sex 
of nestling bullfinches by pulling 
out breast-feathers, 738 ; on 
orioles breeding in immature 
plumage, 739 ; on the sexes and 
young of Buphus and Anastomus, 
741 ; on the young of the black- 
cap and blackbird, 742, 743 ; on 
the young of the stonechat, 743 ; 
on the white plumage of Anas- 
tomus, 751 ; on the horns of 
Bovine animals, 771 ; on the 
horns of Antilope bezoartica, 770, 
773 ; on the mode of fighting of 
Ovis cydoceros, 775, 776 ; on the 
voice of the Gibbons, 804 ; on the 
crest of the male wild goat, 810 ; 
on the colours oi Portax picta, 817 ; 
on the colours of Antilope bezoar- 
tica, 817 ; on the colour of the 
Axis deer, 819 ; on sexual dififer- 
ence of colour in Hylobates hoolock, 
820 ; on the hog-deer, 833 ; on 
the beard and whiskers in a 
monkey, becoming white with 
age, 850 

Boar, wild, polygamous in India, 
336 ; use of the tusks by the, 278 ; 
fighting of, 790 

Boardman, Mr., Albino birds in 
U. S., 639 

Boitard and Corbi6, MM., on the 
transmission of sexual peculiari- 
ties in pigeons, 355 ; on the 
antipathy shewn by some female 
pigeons to certain males, 637 

Bold, Mr., on the singing of a 
sterile hybrid canary, 565 

Bombet, on the variability of the 
standard of beauty in Europe, 910 

Bombus, difference of the sexes in, 
449 

Bombycidse, coloration of, 480 ; 
pairing of the, 487 ; colours of, 
488 

Bombyeilla carolinensis, red ap-‘ 
pendages of, 703 

Bombyx cynthia, 427 ; proportion 
of the sexes in, 385, 389 ; pair- 
ing of, 487 

mori, difference of size of the 

male and female cocoons of, 427 ; 
pairing of, 487 


Pernyi, proportion of sexes of, 

389 

Yamamal, 427 ; M. Person - 

nat on, 387 ; proportion of sexes 
of, 389 

Bonaparte, C. L., on tiie call-notes 
of the wild turkey, 573 
Bond, F., on the finding of new 
mates by crows, 621 
Bone, implements of, skill dis- 
played in making, 74 
Boner, C., on the transfer of male 
characters to an old female cha- 
mois, 769 ; on the habits of stags, 
787 ; on the pairing of red deer, 
797 

Bones, increase of, in length and 
thickness, when carrying a greater 
weight, 47 

Bonizzi, P., difference of colour in 
sexes of pigeons, 355 
Bonnet monkey, 232 
Bonwick, J., extinction of Tasma- 
nians, 284, 285 
Boomerang, 223 

Boreus hyemalis, scarcity of the 
male, 391 

Bory St. Vincent, on the number of 
species of man, 270 ; on the 
colours of Labrus pavo, 524 
Bos etruscus, 112 

gaurus, horns of, 772 

moschatus, 808 

primigenius, 764 

sondaicus, horns of, 771 ; 

colours of, 818 

Botocudos, 221 ; mode of life of, 
305 ; disfigurement of the ears 
and lower lip of the, 876 
Boucher de Perthes, J. C. de, on 
the antiquity of man, 3 
Bourbon, proportion of the sexes in 
a species of Papilio from, 368 
Bourien on the mamage-customs 
of the savages of the Malay 
Archipelago, 913 
Bovidse, dewlaps of, 811 
Bower-birds, 619 ; habits of the, 
581 ; ornamented playing-placcs 
of, 140, 630 
Bows, use of, 277 

Brae by cephalic structure, possible 
explanation of, 84 


BRAOHYURA. 


INDEX. 


BROCA. 


965 


I^rachyura, 414 

Brachyiirus calvus, scarlet face of, 
840 

Bradley, Mr,, abductor ossis meta- 
tarsi quinti in man, 62 

Brain, of man, agi’eement of the, 
with that of lower animals, 8 ; 
convolutions of, in the human 
foetus, 13 ; influence of develop- 
ment of mental faculties upon 
the size of the, 81 ; influence of 
the development of on the 
spinal column and skull, 83 ; 
larger in some existing mammals 
than in their tertiary prototypes, 
123 ; relation of the development 
of the, to the progress of lan- 
guage, 134 ; disease of the, 
affecting speech, 134 ; difference 
in the convolutions of, in dif- 
ferent races of men, 259 ; 
supplement on, by Prof. Huxley, 
309 ; development of the gyri 
and sulci, 315 

Brakenridge, Dr., on the influence 
of climate, 47 

Brandt, A., on hairy men, 28 

Braubach, Prof., on the quasi-reli- 
gious feeling of a dog towards 
his master, 146 ; on the self- 
restraint of dogs, 158 

Brauer, F., on dimorphism in Neu- 
rothemis, 446 

Brazil, skulls found in caves of, 
261 ; population of, 268 ; com- 
pression of the nose by the natives 
of, 888 

Break between man and the apes, 
241 

Bream, proportion of the sexes in 
the, 385 

Breeding, age of, in birds, 738 

season, sexual characters mak- 
ing their appearance in the, in 
birds, 595 

Brehm, on the effects of intoxica- 
ting liquors on monkeys, 10 ; 
on the recognition of women by 
male Cynoccphali, 11 ; on the 
diversity of the mental faculties' 
of monkeys, 40 ; on the habits of 
baboons, 76 ; on revenge taken 
by monkeys, 105 ; on manifesta- 


tions of maternal affection by 
monkeys and baboons, 106 ; on 
the instinctive dread of monkeys 
for serpents, 108 ; on the use of 
stones as missiles by baboons, 
124 ; on a baboon using a mat 
for shelter from the sun, 126 ; on 
the signal-cries of monkeys, 133 ; 
on sentinels posted by monkeys, 
154 ; on co-operation of animals, 
154 ; on an eagle attacking a 
young Cercopithecus, 154 ; on 
baboons in confinement protecting 
one of their number from punish- 
ment, 157 ; on the habits of 
baboons when plundering, 159 ; 
on polygamy in Cynocephalus 
and Cehus^ 335 ; on the numerical 
proportion of the sexes in birds, 
382 ; on the love-dance of the 
blackcock, 556 ; Palamedea cor- 
nuta, 558 ; on the habits of the 
Black-grouse, 560 ; on sounds 
produced by birds of paradise, 
575 ; on assemblages of grouse, 
618 ; on the finding of new mates 
by birds, 623 ; on the fighting of 
w^d boars, 790 ; on sexua’ differ- 
ences in Mycetes, HO; on the 
habits of Cynocephalus hama- 
dryas, 900 

Brent, Mr., on the courtship of 
fowls, 635 

Breslau, numerical proportion of 
male and female births in, 375 

Bridgman, Laura, 134 

Brimstone butterfly, 478 ; sexual 
difference of colour in the, 494 

British, ancient, tattooing practised 
by, 875 

Broca, Prof., on the occurrence of 
the supra- condyloid foramen in 
the human humerus, 31 ; an- 
thropomorphous apes more bipe- 
dal than quadrupedal, 79 ; on 
the capacity of Parisian skulls at 
different periods, 82 ; comparison 
of modern and mediaeval skulls, 
82 ; on tails of quadrupeds, 87 ; 
on the influence of natural selec- 
tion, 91 ; on hybridity in man, 
264 ; on human remains from 
Les Eyzies, 281 ; on the cause of 


966 


BRODIE. 


INDEX. 


BULL-TROUT. 


the difference between Europeans 
and Hindoos, 297 

Brodie, Sir B., on the origin of the 
moral sense in man, 149 
Bronn, H. G., on the copulation of 
insects of distinct species, 423 
Bronze period, men of, in Europe, 197 
Brown, E., sentinels of seals gener- 
ally females, 153 ; on the battles 
of seals, 764 ; on the narwhal, 
766 ; on the occasional absence 
of the tusks in the female walrus, 
766 ; on the bladder-nose seal, 
806 : on the colours of the sexes 
in Phoca Grosnlandica, 816 ; on 
the appreciation of music by 
seals, 866 ; on plants used as 
love-philters, by North American 
women, 880 

Browne, Dr. Crichton, injury to in- 
fants during parturition, 376 
Brown-Sequard, Dr., on the inheri- 
tance of the effects of operations 
by guinea-pig, 90, 920 
Bruce, on the use of the elephant’s 
tusks, 775 

Brulerie, P. de la, on the habits of 
Ateuchus cicatricosus, 460 ; on 
the stridulation of Ateuchus, 468 
Brunnich, on the pied ravens of the 
Feroe islands, 647 
Bryant, Dr., preference of tame 
pigeon for wild mate, 638 

, Capt., on the courtship of 

Callorhinus ursinus, 797 
Buhas bison, thoracic projection of, 
457 

Bubalus caffer, use of horns, 776 
Bucephalus capensis, difference of 
the sexes of, in colour, 538 
Buceros, nidification and incubation 
of, 692 

hicornis, sexual differences in 

the colouring of the casque, beak, 
and mouth in, 649 

corrugatus, sexual differences 

in the beak of, 585 
Buchner, L. , on the origin of man, 
4 ; on the use of the human foot 
as a prehensile organ, 77 ; on the 
mode of progression of the apes, 
78 ; on want of self-consciousness, 
&c., in savages, 127 


Bucholz, Dr., quarrels of chamse- 
leons, 547 

Buckinghamshire, numerical pro- 
portion of male and female births 
in, 374 

Buckland, F., on the numerical 
proportion of the sexes in rats, 
381 ; on the proportion of the 
sexes in the trout, 384 ; on Chi- 
moera monstrosa, 618 
Buckland, W., on the complexity 
of crinoids, 139 

Buckler, W., proportion of sexes of 
Lepidoptera reared by, 389 
Bucorax abyssinicus, inflation of the 
neck-wattle of the male during 
courtship, 584 
Budytes Raii, 327 
Buffalo, Cape, 776 

, Indian, horns of the, 772 

, Italian, mode of fighting of 

the, 776 

Buffon, on the number of species of 
man, 270 

Bufo sikimmensis, 535 
Bugs, 431 

Buist, R., on the proportion of the 
sexes in salmon, 384 ; on the 
pugnacity of the male salmon, 
510 

Bulbul, pugnacity of the male, 552 ; 
display of under tail-coverts by 
the male, 612 

Bull, mode of fighting of the, 775, 
776 ; curled frontal hair of the, 
811 

Buller, Dr., on the Huia, 321 ; the 
attachment of birds, 626 
Bullfinch, sexual differences in the, 
338; piping, 564; female, singing 
of the 566 ; courtship of the, 
610 ; widowed, finding a new 
mate, 623 ; attacking a reed- 
bunting, 629 ; nestling, sex 
ascertained by pulling out breast 
feathers, 738 

Bullfinches, distinguishing persons, 
628 ; rivalry of female, 640 
Bulls, two young, attacking an old 
one, 154 ; wild, battles of, 
764 

Bull-trout, male, colouring of, dur- 
ing the breeding season, 521 


SUXTiNQ. 


INDEX. 


CANARY. 


967 


Bunting, reed, head feathers of the 
male, 611 ; attacked by a bull- 
fincli, 629 

Buntings, cliaracters of young, 709 

Buphus coromandus, sexes and 
young of, 741 ; change of colour 
in, 754, 755 

Burchell, Dr., on the zebra, 832, 
on the extravagance of a Bush- 
woman in adorning herself, 879, 
celibacy unknown among the 
savages of South Africa, 906 ; 
on the maniage-customs of the 
Bushwomen, 914 

Burke, on the number of species of 
man, 270 

Burmese, colour of the beard in, 
850, 

Burton, Capt., on negro ideas of 
female beauty, 882 ; on a uni- 
vemal ideal of beauty, 887 

Bushmen, 96 ; marriage among, 913 

Bushwoman, extravagant ornamen- 
tation of a, 879 

Bushwomen, hair of, 259 ; marriage- 
customs of, 914 

Bustard, throat-pouch of the male, 
570 ; humming noise produced by 
a male, 577 ; Indian, ear-tufts of, 
587 

Bustards, occurrence of sexual dif- 
ferences and of polygamy among 
the, 338 ; love-gestures of the 
male, 581 ; double moult in, 
595, 597 

Butler, A. G., on sexual differences 
in the wings of Aricoris epiius, 
426; courtship of butterflies, 470 ; 
on the colouring of the sexes in 
species of Theda, 475 ; on the re- 
semblance of Iphias glaiicippe to 
a leaf, 479 ; on the rejection of 
certain moths and caterpillars by 
lizards and frogs, 500 

Butterfly, noise produced by a, 
471 ; Emperor,471, 473 ; meadow 
brouTi, instability of the ocellated 
spots of, 653 

Butterflies, proportion of the sexes 
in, 386 ; forelegs atrophied in 
some males, 426 ; sexual differ- 
ence in the neuration of the wings 
of, 426 ; pugnacity of male, 471 ; 


protective resemblances of the 
lower surface of, 477 ; display of 
the wings by, 482 ; white, alight- 
ing upon bits of paper, 486 ; 
attracted by a dead specimen of 
the same species, 486 ; courtship 
of, 486 ; jiiale and female, in- 
habiting different stations, 492 
Buxton, C., observations on macaws, 
156 ; on an instance of bene- 
volence in a paiTot, 627 
Buzzard, Indian honey-, variation 
in the crest of, 646 

C. 

Cabbage butterflies, 478 
Cachalot, large head of the male, 
767- 

Cadences, musical, perception of, by 
animals, 866 

CjECum, 29 ; large, in the early 
progenitors of man, 248 
Cairina moschata, pugnacity of the 
male, 554 

Californian Indians, decrease of, 397 
CalUanassa, chelae of, figured, 411 
Callidryas, colours of sexes, 488 
Callionymus lyra, characters of the 
male, 515 

Callorhinus ursinus, relative size of 
the sexes of, 787 ; courtship of, 
797 

Calotes maria, 548 

nigrilalris, sexual difference 

in the colour of, 547 
Cambridge, 0. Pickard, on the sexes 
of spiders, 392 ; on the size of 
male Nephila, 420 
Camel, canine teeth of male, 766, 
784 

Campbell, J., on the Indian ele- 
phant, 336 ; on the proportion of 
male and female births in the 
harems of Siam, 378 
Campylopterus heviileucurus, 383 
Canaries distinguishing persons, 628 
Canary, polygamy of the, 339 ; 
change of plumage in, after 
moulting, 368 ; female, selecting 
the best singing male, 564 ; 
sterile hybrid, singing of a, 565 ; 
female, singing of the, 566 ; 


968 


CANCER. 


ixNDEX. 


CATLIN. 


selecting a greeutincli, 633 ; and 
siskin, pairing of, 633 
Cancer pagur us, 410 
Canestrini, G. , on rudimentary 
characters and the origin of man, 
4 ; on rudimentary characters, 
15 ; on the movement of the ear 
in man, 19 ; of the variability of 
the veriform appendage in man, 
27 ; on the abnormal division of 
the malar bone in man, 58 ; on 
abnormal conditions of the human 
uterus, 57 ; on the persistence of 
the frontal suture in man, 58 ; 
on the proportion of the sexes in 
silk-moths, 385, 387 ; secondary 
sexual characters of spiders, 418 
Canfield, Dr., on the horns of the 
Antilocapra, 362 

Canine teeth in man, 59 ; diminu- 
tion of, in man, 80 ; diminution 
of, in horses, 80 ; disappearance 
of, in male ruminants, 80 ; large in 
the early progenitors of man, 248 
Canines, and horns, inverse develop- 
ment of, 784 
Canoes, use of, 72, 278 
Cantharis, difference of colour in the 
sexes of a species of, 452 
Cantharus lineatus, 522 
Capercailzie, polygamous, 338 ; pro- 
portion of the sexes in the, 382 ; 
pugnacity of the male, 556 ; pair- 
ing of the, 561 ; autumn meetings 
of the, 566 ; call of the, 573 ; 
duration of the courtship of, 617 ; 
behaviour of the female, 640 ; in- 
convenience of black colour to 
the female, 676 ; sexual difference 
in the coloration of the, 749 ; 
crimson eye-cere of the male, 749 
Capitonidse, colours and nidification 
of the, 694 

Capra cegagrus, 775 ; crest of the 
male, 810 ; sexual difference in 
the colour of, 818 

Capreolus Sihiricus suhecaudatus, 
828 

Caprice, common to man and ani- 
mals, 142 

Caprimulgus, noise made by the 
males of some species of, with 
their wings, 574 


Caprimulgus virginianus, pairing 
of, 561 

Carabidse, 463 

Carbonnier, on the natural history 
of the pike, 384 ; on the relative 
■size of the sexes in fishes, 514 ; 
, courtship of Chinese Macropus, 
522 

Carcineutcs, sexual difference of 
colour in, 697 
Carcinus moenas, 412, 414 
Cardinalis virginianus, 347 
Carduelis elegans, sexual differences 
of the beak in, 551 
Carnivora, marine, polygamous ha- 
bits of, 337 ; sexual differences in 
the colours of, 815 
Carp, numerical proportion of the 
sexes in the, 385 
Carr, R., on the peewit, 560 
Carrier pigeon, late development of 
the wattle in the, 367 
Carrion beetles, stridulation of, 462 
Carrion-hawk, bright coloured fe- 
male of, 731 

Carus, Prof. Y. , on the development 
of the horns in merino sheep, 
363 ; on antlers of red deer, 779 
Cassowary, sexes and incubation of 
the, 729 

Castnia, mode of holding wings, 482 
Castoreum, 807 
Castration, eHects of, 772 
Casuarius galeatus, 729 
Cat, convoluted body in the ex- 
tremity of the tail of a, 33 ; sick, 
sympathy of a dog with a, 157 
Cataract in Cebus Azarce, 9 
Catari’h, liability of Cehus Azarce 
to, 9 

Catarrhine monkeys, 236 
Caterpillars, bright colours of, 
498 

Cathartes aura, 634 
Cathartes jota, love-gestures of the 
male, 581 

Catlin, G. , correlation of colour and 
texture of hair in the Mandans, 
306 ; on the development of the 
beard among North American 
Indians, 853 ; on the great length 
of the hair in some North Ameri- 
can tribes, 884 


CATON. 


INDEX. 


CHALCOPHAPS. 


969 


Caton, J. D., on the development of 
the horns in Cervus virginianus 
and strongyloceros, 361 ; on the 
wild turkey, 704 ; on the presence 
of traces of horns in the female 
wapiti, 769 ; on the fighting of 
deer, 779 ; on the crest of the 
male wapiti, 810 ; on the colours 
of the Virginian deer, 817 ; on 
sexual differences of colour in the 
wapiti, 818 ; on the spots of the 
Virginian deer, 834 
Cats, dreaming, 113 ; tortoise-shell, 
355, 358, 367 ; enticed by vale- 
rian, 809 ; colours of, 828 
Cattle, rapid increase of, in South 
America, 70 ; domestic, lighter in 
winter in Siberia, 354 ; horns of, 
361, 771 ; domestic, sexual differ- 
ences of, late developed, 367 ; 
mumerical proportion of the sexes 
in, 381 

Caudal vertebrae, number of, in ma- 
caques and baboons, 87 ; basal, 
of monkeys, imbedded in the 
body, 88 

Cavolini, observations on Serranus, 
250 

Cebus, maternal affection in a, 106 ; 

gradation of species of, 271 
Apella 317 

Azarce, liability of, to the 

same diseases as man, 9 ; distinct 
sounds produced by, 129 ; early 
maturity of the female, 849 

cajracinus, polygamous, 335 ; 

sexual difierences of colour in, 
820 ; hair on the head of, 838 

vellerosus, hair on the head of, 

838 

Cecidomyiidae, proportions of the 
sexes in, 390 

Celibacy, unknown among the sav- 
ages of South Africa and South 
America, 906 
Centipedes, 421 

Cephalopoda, absence of secondaiy 
sexual characters in, 405 
Cephalopterus omatus^ 570 

penduliger, 571 

Ccramhyx heros, stridulant organ of, 
464 

Ceratodus, paddle of, 55 


Ceratophora aspera^ nasal append- 
ages of, 544 

Stoddartii, nasal horn of, 544 

Cerceris, habits of, 447 
Cercocebus cethiops, whiskers, &c., 
of, 840 

Cercopithecus, young, seized by an 
eagle and rescued by the troop, 
155 ; definition of species of, 271 

cephus, sexual difference of 

colour in, 820, 841 

cynosurus and griseo-viridis, 

colour of the scrotum in, 820 

Diana^ sexual differences of 

colour in, 820, 841, 842 

griseo-viridis, 154 

petaurista, whiskers, &c., of, 

888 

Ceres, of birds, bright colours of, 
749 

Ceriomis TemmiricTcii, swelling of 
the wattles of the male during 
courtship, 584 
Cer villus, weapons of, 784 

moschatus, rudimentary horns 

of the female, 769 
Cervus alces, 361 

campestris, odour of, 807 

canadensis, traces of horns in 

the female, 769 ; attacking a 
man, 780 ; sexual difference in 
the colour of, 818 

elaphus, battles of male, 764 ; 

horns of, with numerous points, 
779 ; long hairs on the throat of, 
796 

Eldi, 361 

Tnantchuricus, 833 

paludosus, colours of, 819 

strongyloceros, 361 

virginianus, 361 ; horns of, in 

course of modification, 781 
Ceryle, male black-belted in some 
species of, 697 
Cetacea, nakedness of, 85 
Ceylon, frequent absence of beard in 
the natives of, 852 
Chaffinch, proportion of the sexes 
in the, 383 ; courtship of the, 610 
Chaffinches, 565 ; new mates found 
by, 622 

Chalcophaps indicus, character of 
young, 709 


970 


CHALCOSOMA. 


INDEX. 


CHRYSOCOCCYX. 


Chalcosoma atlas, sexual differences 
of, 453 

Chamodeo, sexual differences in the 
genus, 545 ; combats of, 547 

hifurcus, 545, 546 

Owenii, 546 

pumilus, 547 

Chamcepetes unicolor, modified wng- 
feather in the male 577 
Chameleons, 543 

Chamois, danger-signals of, 153 ; 
transfer of male characters to an 
old female, 769 

Champneys, Mr., acromio - basilar 
muscle and quadrupedal gait, 
62 

Chapman, Dr., on stridulation in 
Scolytus, 463 

Chapuis, Dr., on the transmission 
of sexual peculiarities in pigeons, 
355 ; on streaked Belgian pigeons,* 
367, 679 

Char, male, colouring of, during the 
breeding season, 521 
Characters, male, developed in fe- 
males, 351 ; secondary sexual, 
transmitted through both sexes, 
351 ; natural, artificial, exaggera- 
tion of, by man, 887 
Charadrus hiaticula and pluvialis, 
sexes and young of, 740 
Chardin on the Persians, 894 
ChaiTus, worn by women, 880 
Charruas, freedom of divorce among 
the, 912 

Chasmorhynchus, difference of colour 
in the sexes of, 592 ; colours of, 
750 

niveus, 592 

nudicoUis, 593 

tricarunculatus, 593 

Chastity, early estimation of, 1 82 
Chatterers, sexual differences in, 
338 

Cheever, Rev. H. T., census of the 
Sandwich Islands, 396 
Cheiroptera, absence of secondary 
sexual characters in, 336 
Chelae of Crustacea, 410, 417 
Chelonia, sexual differences in, 537 
Chenalopex cegyptiacus, wing-knobs 
of, 558 

Cheraprogne, 598, 639 


Chest, proportions of, in soldiers 
and sailors, 48 ; large, of the 
Quechua and Aymara Indians, 50 
Chevrotains, canine teeth of, 784 
Chiasognathus, stridulation of, 468 

Grantii, mandibles oi, 461 

Children, legitimate and illegiti- 
mate, proportion of the sexes in, 
377 

Chiloe, lice of the natives of, 263 ; 

population of, 268 
Chimcera monstrosa, bony process on 
the head of the male, 518 
Chimaeroid fishes, prehensile organs 
of male, 508 

Chimpanzee, 854 ; ears of the, 20 ; 
representatives of the eyebrows in 
the, 26 ; hands of the, 75 ; ab- 
sence of mastoid processes in the, 
79 ; platforms built by the, 100 ; 
cracking nuts with a stone, 123 ; 
direction of the hair on the arms 
of the, 233 ; supposed evolution 
of the, 274 ; polygamous and 
social habits of the, 394 
China, North, idea of female beauty 
in, 880 

Southern, inhabitants of, 305 

Chinese, use of Hint tools by the, 
224 ; difficulty of distinguishing 
the races of the, 259 ; colour of 
the beard in, 850 ; general beard- 
lessness of the, 852 ; opinions of 
the, on the appearance of Euro- 
peans and Cingalese, 880, 881 ; 
compression of the feet of, 888 
Chinsurdi, his opinion of beards, 
877, 885 

Chlamydera maculata, 582 
Chloedn, pedunculated eyes of the 
male of, 422 

Chloephaga, coloration of the sexes 
in, 702 

Chloroeoelus Tanana (figured), 438 
Chorda dorsalis, 248 
Chough, red beak of the, 749 
Chromidae, frontal protuberance in 
male, 520 ; sexual differences in 
colour of, 529 

Chrysemys picta, long claws of the 
male, 537 

ChrysococcyXy characters of young 
of, 709 


CHRYSOMELID^. 


INDEX. 


COLOUR. 


971 


Chiysomelidae, stridiilation of, 463 
Cicada pruiTiosa, 434 

septendccim, 433 

Cicadae, songs of the, 433 ; rudi- 
mentary sound-organs in females 
of, 442 

Cicatrix of a burn, causing modifi- 
cation of the facial bones, 83 
Cichla, frontal protuberance of male, 
520 

Cimeti^re du Sud, Paris, 31 
Cincloramphus cruralis, large size 
of male, 554 
Cinclus aquatkus, 694 
Cingalese, Chinese opinion of the 
appearance of the, 881 
Cirripedes, complemental males of, 
321 

Civilisation, effects of, upon natural 
selection, 205 ; influence of, in 
the competition of nations, 284 
Clanging of geese, &c., 563 
Claparede, E., on natural selection 
applied to man, 73 
Clarke, on the marriage-customs of 
Kalmucks, 913 
Classification, 228 
Claus, C., on the sexes of Saphirina, 
416 

Cleft-palate, inherited, 53 
ClimcLcteris erythrops, sexes of, 731 
Climate, 47 ; cool, favourable to 
human progress, 204 ; power of 
supporting extremes of, by man, 
282 ; want of connexion of, with 
colour, 298 ; direct action of, on 
colours of birds, 644, 645 
Cloaca, existence of a, in the early 
progenitors of man, 248 
Cloacal passage existing in the 
human embryo, 13 
Clubs, used as weapons before dis- 
persion of mankind, 278 
Clucking of fowls, 563 
Clythra ^-punctata, stridulation of, 
463 

Coan, Mr., Sandwich -islanders, 290 
Cobbe, Miss, on morality in hypo- 
thetical bee-community, 152 
Cobra, ingenuity of a, 539 
Coccus^ 226 

Coccyx, 32, 33 ; in the human 
embryo, 13 ; convoluted body at 


the extremity of the, 33 ; im- 
bedded in the body, 88 
Cochin-China, notions of beauty of 
the inhabitants of, 881, 883 
Cock, blind, fed by its companion, 
157 ; game, killing a kite, 555 ; 
comb and wattles of the, 614 ; 
preference shewn by the, for 
young hens, 641 ; game, trans- 
parent zone in the h^ackles of a, 
656 

Cock of the rock, 618 
Cockatoos, 749, 751, 752; nestling, 
627 ; black, immature plumage 
of, 713 

Coelenterata, absence of secondary 
sexual characters in, 400 
Coffee, fondness of monkeys for, 9 
Cold, supposed effects of, 47 ; power 
of supporting, by man, 282 
Coleoptera, 451 ; stridulation of, 
437 ; stridulant organs of, dis- 
cussed, 466 

Colias edusa and hyale, 489 
Collingwood, C., on the pugnacity 
of the butterflies of Borneo, 471 ; 
on butterflies being attracted by 
a dead specimen of the same 
species, 486 

Colobus, absence of the thumb, 76 
Colombia, flattened heads of savages 
of, 875 

Colonists, success of the English as, 
218 

Coloration, protective, in birds, 745 
Colour, supposed to be dependent 
on light and heat, 47 ; correlation 
of, with immunity from certain 
poisons and parasites, 299 ; pur- 
pose of, in lepidoptera, 485 ; 
relation of, to sexual functions, 
in fishes, 525 ; difference of, in 
the sexes of snakes, 538 ; sexual 
differences of, in lizards, 547 ; 
influence of, in the pairing of 
birds of different species, 633 ; 
relation of, to nidification, 690, 
695 ; sexual differences of, in 
mammals, 814, 823 ; recogni- 
tion of, by quadrupeds, 824 ; of 
children, in different races of 
man, 848 ; of the skin in man, 
922 


972 


COLOURS. 


INDEX. 


CRICKET. 


Colours, admired alike by man and 
animals, 141 ; bright, due to 
sexual selection, 401 ; bright, 
among the lower animals, 401, 
402 ; bright, protective to butter- 
flies and moths, 479 ; bright, in 
male fishes, 514, 520 ; transmis- 
sion of, in birds, 682 
Colquhoun, example of reasoning in 
a retriever, 118 

Columha passerina, young of, 713 
ColyrribusglaciaUs, anomalous young 
of, 736 

Comb, development of, in fowls, 369 
Combs and wattles in male birds, 
614 

Community, preservation of varia- 
tions useful to the, by natural 
selection, 94 

Complexion, different in men and 
women, in an African tribe, 847 
Compositse, gradation of species 
among the, 271 

Comte, C., on the expression of the 
ideal of beauty by sculpture, 886 
Conditions of life, action of changed, 
upon man, 45 ; influence of, on 
plumage of birds, 721 
Condor, eyes and comb of the, 649 
Conjugations, origin of, 139 
Conscience, 148, 177, 193 ; absence 
of, in some criminals, 178 
Constitution, difference of, in dif- 
ferent races of men, 260 
Consumption, liability of Cebus 
Azarce to, 9 ; connexion between 
complexion and, 301 
Convergence of characters, 274 
Cooing of pigeons and doves, 572 
Cook, Capt., on the nobles of the 
Sandwich Islands, 894 
Cope, E. D., on the Dinosauria, 2f5 
Cophotis ceylanica, sexual differ- 
ences of, 543 
Copris, 453 

Isidis, sexual differences of, 

454 

lunaris, stridulation of, 464 

Corals, bright colours of, 400 
Coral-snakes, 540 

Cordylus, sexual difference of colour 
in a species of, 547 
Corfu, habits of the Chaffinch in, 383 


Cornelius, on the proportions of the 
sexes in iMcanus Cervns, 390 
Corpora Wolffiana, 248 ; agreement 
of, with the kidneys of fishes, 13 
Correlated variation, 64 
Correlation, influence of, in the pro- 
duction of races, 306 
Corse, on the mode of fighting of 
the elephant, 784 
Corvus corone, 621 

graculus, red beak of, 749 

pica, nuptial assembly of, 619 

Corydalis cornutiis, large jaws of the 
male, 423 

Cosmetornis, 613, 705 
Cosmetornis vexillarius, elongation 
of wing-feathers in, 586, 613 
Cotingidae, sexual differences in, 
338 ; coloration of the sexes of, 
701 ; resemblance of the females 
of distinct species of, 717 
Coitus scorpius, sexual differences 
in, 515 

Coulter, Dr., on the Californian In- 
dians, 397 

Counting, origin of, 222 ; limited 
power of, in primeval man, 279 
Courage, variability of, in the same 
species, 105 ; universal high ap- 
preciation of, 181 ; importance of, 
199 ; characteristic of men, 859 
Courtship, greater eagerness of males 
in, 341 ; of fishes, 509, 521 ; of 
birds, 561, 573, 617 
Cow, winter change of colour, 828 
Crab, devil, 414 

, sliore, habits of, 412 

Crabro cribrarius, dilated tibiae of 
the male, 424 

Crabs, proportions of the sexes in, 
392 

Cranz, on the inheritance of dex- 
terity in seal-catching, 48 
Crawfurd, on the number of species 
of man, 270 

Crenilabrus massa and C. melops, 
nests, built by, 528 
Crest, origin of, in Polish fowls, 356 
Crests, of birds, difference of, in 
the sexes, 713 ; dorsal hairy, of 
mammals, 810 

Cricket, field-, stridulation of the, 
435, 436 ; pugnacity of male, 443 


CRICKET. 


INDEX. 


CYXOCEPHALrS. 


973 


Cricket, house-, stridulation of the, 
43 

Crickets, sexual differences in, 444 
Ciinoids, complexity of, 139 
CrioceridfE, stridulation of the, 463 
Croaking of frogs, 536 
Crocodiles, musky odour of, during 
the breeding season, 538 
Crocodilia, 537 

Crossbills, characters of young, 708 
Crosses in man, 267 
Crossing of races, effects of the, 297 
Crossoptilon auritum, Q09, 688, 720 ; 
adornment of both sexes of, 364 ; 
sexes alike in, 702 
Crotch, G. R., on the stridulation 
of beetles, 463, 466 ; on the 
stridulation of Hdiopathes, 467 ; 
on the stridulation of Acalles, 
468 ; habit of female deer at 
breeding time, 768 
Crow, Indians, long hair of the, 884 

, young of the, 735 

Crows, 749; vocal organs of the, 
567 ; living in triplets, 624 

, carrion, new mates found by, 

621 

, Indian, feeding their blind 

companions, 157 

Cruelty of savages to animals, 180 
Crustacea, parasitic, loss of limbs 
by female, 321 ; prehensile feet 
and antennae of, 323 ; male, 
more active than female, 341 ; 
parthenogenesis in, 392 ; secon- 
daiy sexual characters of, 408 ; 
amphipod, males sexually mature 
while young, 740 ; auditory hairs 
of, 866 

Crystal worn in the lower lip by 
some Central African women, 877 
Cuckoo fowls, 368 
Culicidee, 321, 431 ; attracted by 
each other’s humming, 431 
Cullen, Dr., on the throat-pouch of 
the male bustard, 570 
Cultivation of plants, probable 
origin of, 204 

Cupples, Mr. , on the numerical pro- 
portion of the sexes in dogs, 
sheep, and cattle, 380 ; on the 
Scotch deerhound, 788 ; on sexual 
preference in dogs, 799 


Curculionidge, sexual difference in 
length of snout in some, 321 ; 
hornlike processes in male, 458 ; 
musical, 462, 463 

Curiosity, manifestations of, by ani- 
mals, 108 

Curlews, double moult in, 594 
Cursores, comparative absence of 
sexual differences among the, 339 
Curtis, J., on the proportion of the 
sexes in Athalia, 391 
Cuvier, F., on the recognition of 
women by male quadrumana, 11 

, G., on the number of caudal 

vertebrae in the mandrill, 87 ; 
on instinct and intelligence, 101 ; 
views of, as to the position of 
man, 230 ; on the position of 
the seals, 231 ; on Hectocotyle, 
405 

Cyanalcyon, sexual difference in 
colours of, 697 ; immature plu- 
mage of, 712 

Cyanecula mecica, sexual differen- 
ces of, 720 

Cychrus, sounds produced by, 466 
Gycnia mendica, sexual difference 
of, in colour, 484 
Cygnus ferus, trachea of, 66 

immutabilis, 737 

olor, white young of, 736, 737 

Cyllo Leda, instability of the ocel- 
lated spots of, 653 
Cynanthus, variation in the genus, 
646 

Cynipidae, proportion of the sexes 
in, 390 

Cynocephalus, difference of the young 
from the adult, 11 ; male, re- 
cognition of women by, 1 1 ; poly- 
gamous habits of species of, 335 

babouin, 949 

chacma, 107 

gelada, 124 

hamadryas, 124, 900 ; sexual 

difference of colour in, 821, 949 

leucophceus, colours of the 

sexes of, 821, 949 

mormon, colours of the male, 

822, 949 

Cynocephalus porcar his, mane of the 
male, 795 
sphinx, 949 


974 


CYNOPITHECUS. 


INDEX. 


DESMAREST. 


Cynopithecus niger, ear of, 23 
Cypridina, proportions of the sexes 
in, 392 

Cyprinidse, proportion of the sexes 
in the, 385 
Indian, 526 

CyprinodontidjE, sexnal differences 
in the, 514, 516 
Cyprinus auratus, 524 
Cypris, relation of the sexes in, 392 
Cyrtodactylus ruhidus, 542 
Cystophora cristata^ hood of, 806 

D 

Dacelo, sexual difference of colour 
in, 697 

Gaudichaudi, young male of, 

713 

Dal-ripa, a kind of ptarmigan, 382 
Damalis albifrons, peculiar mark- 
ings of, 831 

pygarga, peculiar markings of, 

830 

Dampness of climate, supposed in- 
fluence of, on the colour of the 
skin, 47, 299 
Danaidse, 472 
Dances of birds, 580 
Dancing, universality of, 276 
Danger-signals of animals, 153 
Daniell, Dr., his expeiience of resi- 
dence in West Africa, 302 
Darfur, protuberances artificially 
produced by natives of, 875 
Darwin, F., on the stridulation of 
Dermestes murinus, 463 
Dasychira pudihunda, sexual dif- 
ference of colour in, 484 
Davis, A. H., on the pugnacity of 
the male stag-beetle, 459 

, J. B., on the capacity of the 

skull in various races of men, 82 ; 
on the beards of the Polynesians, 
853 

Death’s Head Sphinx, 472 
Death-rate higher in towns than in 
rural districts, 213 
Death-tick, 469 

De Candolle, Alph., on a case of 
inherited power of moving the 
scalp, 18 

Declensions, origin of, 139 


Decoration in birds, 583 
Decticus, 438 

Deer, 361 ; development of the 
horns in, 361 ; spots of young, 
708, 834 ; horns of, 767, 774 ; 
use of horns of, 779, 790 ; horns 
of a, in course of modification, 
781 ; size of the horns of, 786 ; 
female, pairing with one male 
whilst others are fighting for her, 
797 ; male, attracted by the 
voice of the female, 803 ; male, 
odour emitted by, 807, 808 

, Axis, sexual difference in the 

colour of the, 819 

, fallow, different coloured 

herds of, 825 

, Mantchurian, 833 

, Virginian, 834 ; colour of the, 

not affected by castration, 817 ; 
colours of, 819 

Deerhound, Scotch, greater size of 
the male, 367, 788 
Defensive orders of mammals, 790 
De Geer, C. , on a female spider de- 
stroying a male, 419 
Dekay, Dr. , on the bladder-nose seal, 
807 

Delorenzi, G., division of malar 
bone, 58 

Demerara, yellow fever in, 301 
Dendrocygna, 709 

Dendrophila frontalis, young of, 743 
Denison, Sir W., manner of ridding 
themselves of vermin among the 
Australians, 86 ; extinction of 
Tasmanians, 285 

Denny, H., on the lice of domestic 
animals, 263 

Der'tnestes murinus, stridulation of, 
463 

Descent traced through the mother 
alone, 898 

Deserts, protective colouring of ani- 
mals inhabiting, 746 
Desmarcst, on the absence of sub- 
orbital pits in Antilope suhguttu- 
Tosa, 808 ; on the whiskers of 
Macacus, 811 ; on the colour of 
the opossum, 814 ; on the colours 
of the sexes of Mus minutus, 815 ; 
on the colouring of the ocelot, 
816 ; on the colours of seals, 816 ; 


DESMOULINS. 


INDEX. 


DOLICHOCEPHALIC. 


975 


on Antilope caama^ 818 ; on the 
colours of goats, 819 ; on sexual 
diflerence of colour in A teles 
marginatus, 820 ; on the man- 
drill, 822 ; on Macacus cyno- 
molgus, 849 

Desmoulins, on the number of spe- 
cies of man, 270 ; on the musk- 
deer, 809 

Desor, on the imitation of man by- 
monkeys, 110 

Despine, P., on criminals destitute 
of conscience, 178 
Development, embryonic of man, 
12, 13, 15 ; correlated^ 650 
Devil, not believed in by the Fue- 
gians, 145 
Devil-crab, 414 

Devonian, fossil-insect from the, 443 
Dewlaps, of Cattle and antelopes, 
811 

Diademay sexual differences of co- 
louring in the species of, 473 
Diamond-beetles, bright colours of, 
451 

Diastema, occurrence of, in man, 60 
Diastylidae, proportion of the sexes 
in, 392 

Dicrurus^ racket-shaped feathers in, 
587 ; nidification of, 691 

macrocercus, change of plumage 

in, 703 

DidelpMs opossum, sexual difference 
in the colour of, 814 
Differences, comparative, between 
different species of birds of the 
same sex, 718 

Digits, supernumerary, more fre- 
quent in men than in women, 
345 ; supernumerary, inheritance 
of, 358 ; supernumeraiy, early 
development of, 366 
Dimorphism, in females of water- 
beetles, 424 ; in Neurothemis 
and Agrion, 446 

Diodorus, on the absence of beard 
in the natives of Ceylon, 852 
Dipelicus Canton, sexual differences 
of, 454 

Diplopoda, preliensile limbs of the 
male, 421 

Dipsos cynodon, sexual difference in 
the colour of, 538 


Diptera, 430 

Disease, generated by the contact of 
distinct peoples, 283 
Diseases, common to man and the 
lower animals, 9 ; difference of 
liability to, in different races of 
men, 260 ; new, effects of, upon 
savages, 283 ; sexually limited, 
366 

Display, coloration of Lepidoptera 
for, 481 ; of plumage by male 
birds, 600, 612 

Distribution, wide, of man, 72 ; 
geographical, as evidence of spe- 
cific distinctness in man, 261 
Disuse, effects of, in producing 
rudimentary organs, 1 6 ; and use 
of parts, effects of, 47 ; of parts, 
influence of, on the races of men, 
305 

Divorce, freedom of, among the 
Charruas, 912 

Dixon, E. S., on the pairing of dif- 
ferent species of geese, 632 ; on 
the courtship of peafowl, 640 
Dobrizhoffer, on the mamage-cus- 
toms of the Abipones, 914 
Dobson, Dr., on the Cheiroptera, 
337 ; scent-glands of bats, 807 ; 
frugivorous bats, 815 
Dogs, suffering from tertian ague, 
10 ; memory of, 112 ; dreaming, 
113 ; diverging when drawing 
sledges over thin ice, 114 ; exer- 
cise of reasoning faculties by, 118 ; 
domestic, progress of, in moral 
qualities, 122 ; distinct tones ut- 
tered by, 129 ; parallelism be- 
tween his affection for his master 
and religious feeling, 146 ; socia- 
bility of the, 153 ; sympathy of, 
with a sick cat, 157 ; sympathy 
of, with his master, 157 ; their 
possession of conscience, 158 ; 
possible use of the hair on the 
fore-legs of the, 233 ; races of the, 
273 ; numerical proportion of male 
and female bii'ths in, 379 ; sexual 
affection between individuals of, 
799 ; howling at certain notes, 
866 ; rolling in carrion, 809 
Dolichocephalic structure, possible 
cause of, 84 


976 


DOLPHINS. 


INDEX. 


EAGLES. 


Dolphins, nakedness of, 85 
Domestic animals, races of, 273 ; 

change of breeds of, 909 
Domestication, influence of, in re- 
moving the sterility of hybrids, 
266 

D’Orbigny, A., on the influence of 
dampness and dryness on the 
colour of the skin, 299 ; on the 
Yuracaras, 883 
Dotterel, 223 

Doubleday, E. , on sexual differences 
in the wings of butterflies, 426 

, H. , on the proportion of the 

sexes in the smaller moths, 387 ; 
males of Lasiocampa quercus and 
on the attraction of the Saturnia 
carpini by the female, 388 ; on 
the proportion of the sexes in the 
Lepidoptera, 388 ; on the ticking 
of Anobium tesselatum, 469 ; on 
the structure of Ageronia feronia, 
471 ; on white butterflies alight- 
ing upon paper, 486 
Douglas, J. W., on the sexual dif- 
ferences of the Hemiptera, 432 ; 
colours of British Homoptera, 
432 

Down, of birds, 594 
Draco, gular appendages of, 543 
Dragonet, Gemmeous, 515 
Dragon-flies, caudal appendages of 
male, 425 ; relative size of the 
sexes of, 428 ; difference in the 
sexes of, 445 ; want of pugnacity 
by the male, 447 

Drake, breeding plumage of the, 598 
Dreams, 113 ; possible source of the 
belief in spiritual agencies, 144 
Drill, sexual difference of colour in 
the, 821 

Dromceus irroratus, 730 
Dromolcea, Saharan species of, 695 
Drongo shrike, 703 
Drongos, racket-shaped feathers in 
the tails of, 586, 597 
Dryness of climate, supposed influ- 
ence of, on the colour of the skin, 
299 

Dryopithecus, 240 

Duck, harlequin, age of mature 
plumage in the, 738 ; breeding 
m immature plumage, 739 


Duck, long- tailed, preference of male, 
for certain females, 641 

, pintail, pairing with a md- 

geon, 632 

, voice of the, 572 ; pairing Avith 

- a shield-drake, 632 ; immature 
plumage of the, 712 

, wild, sexual differences in the, 

337 ; speculum and male charac- 
ters of, 364 ; pairing with a pin- 
tail drake, 633 

Ducks, wild, becoming polygamous 
under partial domestication, 339 ; 
dogs and cats recognised by, 628 
Dufosse, Dr., sounds produced by 
fish, 531 

Dugong, nakedness of, 85 ; tusks of, 
766 

Dujardin, on the relative size of the 
cerebral ganglia, in insects, 81 
Duncan, Dr., on the fertility of 
early marriages, 212 ; compara- 
tive health of married and single, 
216 

Dupont, M., on the occurrence of 
the supra-condyloid foramen in 
the humerus of man, 31 
Durand, J. P., on causes of varia- 
tion, 44 

Dureau de la Malle, on the songs of 
birds, 131 ; on the acquisition of 
an air by blackbirds, 567 
Dutch, retention of their colour by 
the, in South Africa, 299 
Duty, sense of, 148 
Duvaucel, female Hylobates washing 
her young, 106 

Dyaks, pride of, in mere homicide, 
179 

Dynastes, large size of males of, 428 
Dynastini, stridulation of, 465 
Dytiscus, dimorphism of females of, 
424 ; grooved elytra of the female, 
424 

E. 

Eagle, young Cercopithecus rescued 
from, by the troop, 155 

. w’hite-headed, breeding in 

immature plumage, 739 
Eagles, golden, new mate.s found 
by, 622 


EAR. 


INDEX. 


EMPEROR. 


977 


Ear, motion of the, 19 ; external 
shell of the, useless in man, 20 ; 
rudimentary point of the, in man, 
21 

Ears, more variable in men than 
women, 345 ; piercing and orna- 
mentation of the, 876 
Earwigs, parental feeling in, 162 
Echidna, 241 

Echini, l)right colours of some, 401 
Echinodermata, absence of secon- 
dary sexual characters in, 400 
Echis carinata, 641 
Ecker, figure of the human em- 
bryo, 14 ; on the development of 
the gyri and sulci of the brain, 
315 ; on the sexual differences in 
the pelvis in man, 847 ; on the 
presence of a sagittal crest in 
Australians, 849 

Edentata, former wide range of, in 
America, 262 ; absence of secon- 
dary sexual character in, 836 
Edolius, racket-shaped feathers in, 
587 

Edwards, Mr., on the proportion of 
the sexes in North American 
species of Papilio, 386 
Eels, hermaphroditism of, 250 
Egerton, Sir P., on the use of the 
antlers of deer, 779, 780 ; on the 
pairing of red deer, 797 ; on the 
bellowing of stags, 803 
Eggs, hatclied by male fishes, 529 
Egret, Indian, sexes and young of, 
741 

Egrets, breeding plumage of, 595 ; 
white, 751 

Ehrenberg, on the mane of the male 
Hamadryas baboon, 795 
Ekstrom, M., on Harelda glacialis, 
641 

Elachista rufodnerea, habits of 
male, 388 

Eland, development of the horns of 
the, 362 

Elands, sexual differences of colour 
in, 817 

Elaphomyia, sexual differences in, 
430 

Elaphrus uliginosus, stridulation of, 
463 

Elaps, 540, 541 

3 


Elaterid£E, proportion of the sexes 
in, 390 

Elaters, luminous, 427 
Elephant, 241 ; rate of increase of 
the, 70 ; nakedness of the, 85 ; 
using a fan, 124 ; Indian, for- 
bearance to his keeper, 158 ; 
polygamous habits of the, 336 ; 
pugnacity of the male, 764 ; tusks 
of, 766, 767, 774, 785, 786 ; 
Indian, mode of fighting of the, 
784 ; male, odour emitted by the, 
807 ; attacking white or grey 
horses, 824 

Elevation of abode, modifying in- 
fluence of, 52 

Elimination of inferior individuals, 
211 

Elk, 775 ; winter change of the, 828 

, Irish, horns of the, 786 

Ellice Islands, beards of the natives, 
853, 886 

Elliot, D. G. , on Pelecanios erythro> 
rhynchus, 594 

, R., on the numerical pro- 
portion of the sexes in young 
rats, 381 ; on the proportion of 
the sexes in sheep, 380 

, Sir W., on the polygamous 

habits of the Indian wild boar, 
336 

Ellis, on the prevalence of infanti* 
cide in Polynesia, 902 
Elphinstone, Mr., on local differ* 
ence of stature among the Hin- 
doos, 46 ; on the difl&culty of 
distinguishing the native races 
of India, 258 

Elytra, of the females of Dytiscus 
Adlius, Hydroporus, 424 
Emheriza, characters of young, 709 

miliaria, 709 

schceniclus, 628 ; head-feathers 

of the male, 611 

Embryo of man, 13, 14 ; of the dog, 
14 

Embryos of mammals, resemblance 
of the, 36 
Emigration, 211 

Emotions experienced by the lower 
animals in common with man, 
104 ; manifested by animals, 103 
Emperor butterfly, 471 

R 


EMPEROR. 


978 


INDEX. eyelashes. 


Emperor moth, 483 
Emu, sexes and incubation of, 730 
Emulation of singing birds, 565 
Endurance, estimation of, 181 
Energy, a characteristic of men, 
859 

England, numerical proportion of 
male and female births in, 374 
Engleheart, Mr., on the finding of 
new mates by starlings, 623 
Pmglish, success of, as colonists, 218 
Engravers, short-sighted, 49 
Entomostraca, 414 
Entozoa, difference of colour between 
the males and females of some, 
400 

Environment, direct action of the, 
in causing differences between the 
sexes, 347 

Envy, persistence of, 172 
Eocene period, possible divergence 
of men during the, 241 
Eolidae, colours of, produced by the 
biliary glands, 403 
Epeira nigra, small size of the male 
of, 419 

Ephemerse, 422 
Ephemeridse, 444 

Ephippiger vitium, stridulating or- 
gans of, 437, 442 

Epicalia, sexual differences of colour- 
ing in the species of, 473 
Equus hemionus, Avintcr change of, 
828 

Erateina, coloration of, 483 
Ercolani, Prof., hermaphroditism in 
cels, 250 

Erect attitude of man, 76, 77 
Eristalis, courting of, 431 
Eschricht, on the development of 
hair in man, 26 ; on a languinous 
moustache in a female foetus, 27 ; 
on the want of definition between 
the scalp and the forehead in 
some children, 233 ; on the ar- 
rangement of the hair in the 
human foetus, 234 ; on the hairi- 
ness of the face in the human 
foetus of both sexes, 919, 921 
Esmeralda, difference of colour in 
the sexes of, 452 
Esox Indus, 384 
• rcticulatus, 521 


Esquimaux, 96, 204 ; their belief in 
the inheritance of dexterity in 
seal-catching, 48 ; mode of life 
of, 305 

Estrelda amandava, pugnacity of 
the male, 560 

Euhagis, sexual differences of colour- 
ing in the species of, 474 
Euchirus longimanus, sound pro- 
duced by, 465 
Eudromias morinellus, 729 
Eulampis jugularis, colours of the 
female, 691 

Euler, on the rate of increase in the 
United States, 66 

Eunomota superdliaris, i-acket- 
shaped feathers in the tail of, 
586 

Eupetomena macroura, colours of 
the female, 691 
Euphema splendida, 697 
Euplocamus eryihrophthalmus, pos- 
session of spurs by the female, 
557 

Europe, ancient inhabitants of, 281 
Europeans, difference of, from Hin- 
doos, 297 ; hairiness of, probably 
due to reversion, 918 
Eurostopodus, sexes of, 731 
Eurygnathus, different proportions 
of the head in the sexes of, 425 
Eustephanus, sexual differences of 
species of, 550 ; young of, 743 
Exaggeration of natural characters 
by man, 887 
Exogamy, 899, 902 
Experience, acquisition of, by ani- 
mals, 122 

Expression, resemblances in, be- 
tween man and the apes, 232 
Extinction of races, causes of, 281 
Eye, destruction of the, 4 7 ; change 
of position in, 83 ; obliquity of, 
regarded as a beauty by the 
Chinese and Japanese, 880 
Eyebrows, elevation of, 17 ; de- 
velopment of long hairs in, 26 ; 
in monkeys, 233 ; eradicated in 
parts of South America and Africa, 
876; eradication of, by the Indians 
of Paraguay, 884 

Eyelashes, eradication of, by the 
Indians of Parnguay, 884 


EYELIDS. 


INDEX. 


FICK. 


979 


Eyelids, coloured black, in part of 
Africa, 874 

Eyes, pillared, of the male of 
Chloeon, 422 ; difference in the 
colour of, in the sexes of birds, 
649 

Eyton, T. C., observations on the 
development of the horns in the 
fallow deer, 361 

Eyzies, Les, human remains from, 
281 

F. 

Fabre, M., on the habits of Cerceris, 
477 

Facial bones, causes of modifica- 
tion of the, 83 

Faculties, diversity of, in the same 
race of men, 40 ; inheritance of, 
41 ; diversity of, in animals of 
the same species, 41 ; mental 
variation of, in the same species, 
100 ; of birds, 625 
Fakirs, Indian, tortures undergone 
by, 181 

Falco leucocephaliLSy 739 

peregrinuSy 621, 703 

tiiinunchiSy 622 

Falcon, peregrine, new mate found 
by, 621, 622 

Falconer, H. , on the mode of fighting 
of the Indian elephant, 784 ; on 
canines in a female deer, 785 ; 
on Hyomoschus aquaticiiSy 834 
Falkland Islands, horses of, 280 
Fallow-deer, different coloured 
herds of, 825 

Famines, frequency of, among 
savages, 68 

Farr, Dr., on the effects of profli- 
gacy, 211 ; on the influence of 
marriage on mortality, 214, 215 
Farrar, F. W., on the origin of 
language, 132 ; on the crossing 
or blending of languages, 138 ; on 
the absence of the idea of God in 
certain races of men, 143 ; on 
early marriages of the poor, 212 ; 
on the middle ages, 217 
Farre, Dr., on the structure of the 
uterus, 56 

Fashions, long prevalence of, among 
savages, 878, 890 


Faye, Prof., on the numerical pro- 
portion of male and female births 
in Norway and Kussia, 375 ; on 
the greater mortality of male 
children at and before birth, 376 
Feathers, modified, producing 
sounds, 575 et seq., 686 ; elon- 
gated, in male birds, 585, 613 ; 
racket-shaped, 586 ; barbless and 
with filamentous barbs in certain 
birds, 587 ; shedding of margins 
of, 599 

Feeding, high, probable influence 
of, in the pairing of birds of differ- 
ent species, 634 

Feet, thickening of the skin on the 
soles of the, 49 ; modification of, 
in man, 77 

Felis canadensis, throat-ruff of, 795 

pardalis and F. mitis, sexual 

difference in the colouring of, 
815, 816 

Female, behaviour of the, during 
courtship, 242 

birds, differences of, 718 

Females, presence of rudimentary 
male organs in, 250 ; preference of, 
for certain males, 330 ; pursuit 
of, by males, 341 ; occurrence of 
secondary sexual characters in, 
347 ; development of male char- 
acter by, 350 

Females and males, comparative 
numbers of, 329, 332 ; compara- 
• five mortality of, while young, 332 
Femur and tibia, proportions of, in 
the Aymara Indians, 51 
Fenton, Mr., decrease of Maories, 
286 ; infanticide amongst the 
Maories, 394 

Ferguson, Mr., on the courtship of 
fowls, 636 

Fertilisation, phenomena of, in 
plants, 343 ; in the lower ani- 
mals, 343 

Fertility lessened under changed 
conditions, 292 

I^evers, immunity of Negi-oes and 
Mulattoes from, 300 
Fiber zihethicus, protective colouring 
of it, 827 

Fick, H., effect of conscription for 
militaiy service, 207 


980 


FIDELITY. 


INDEX. 


FOWLS. 


Fidelity, in the elephant, 158 ; of 
savages to one another, 180 ; im- 
portance of, 191 

Field-slaves, difference of, from 
house-slaves, 305 

Fiji Archipelago, population of the, 
269 

Islands, beards of the natives, 

853, 885 ; marriage-customs of 
the, 912 

Fijians, burying their old and sick 
parents alive, 156 ; estimation of 
the beard among the, 885 ; ad- 
miration of, for a broad occiput, 
888 

Filial affection, partly the result of 
natural selection, 161 
Filum terminate, 33 
Finch, racket-shaped feathers in the 
tail of a, 586 

Finches, spring change of colour in, 
599, 600 ; British, females of the, 
718 

Fingers, partially coherent, in 
species of Eylohates, 76 
Finlayson, on the Cochin Chinese, 
881 

Fire, use of, 72, 223, 278 
Fischer, on the pugnacity of the 
male of Lethrus cephalotes, 460 
Fischer, F. Von, on display of 
brightly coloured parts by mon- 
keys in courtship, 948 
Fish, eagerness of male, 341 ; pro- 
portion of the sexes in, 384 ; 
sounds produced by, 531 
Fishes, kidneys of, represented by 
Corpora Wolffiana in the human 
embryo, 13 ; male, hatching ova 
in their mouths, 251 ; receptacles 
for ova possessed by, 320 ; rela- 
tive size of the sexes in, 514 ; 
fresh-water, of the tropics, 525 ; 
protective resemblances in, 526 ; 
change of colour in, 527 ; nest- 
building, 528 ; spawning of, 529 ; 
sounds produced by, 531, 862 ; 
continued growth of, 740 
Flamingo, age of mature plumage, 
738 

Flexor pollicis longus, similar varia- 
tion of, in man, 63 
Flies, humming of, 431 


Flint tools, 224 

Flints, difficulty of chipping into 
form, 74 

Florida, Quiscalus major in, 383 

Florisuga mellivora, 675 

Flounder, coloration of the, 526 

Flower, W. H., on the abductor of 
the fifth metatarsal in apes, 62 ; 
on the position of the Seals, 231 ; 
on the Pithecia moTiachu, 312 ; 
on the throat-pouch of the male 
bustard, 570 

Fly-catchers, colours and nidifica- 
tion of, 693 

Foetus, human, woolly covering of 
the, 27 ; arrangement of the hair 
on, 234 

Food, influence of, upon stature, 
46 

Foot, prehensile power of the, re- 
tained in some savages, 77 ; pre- 
hensile, in the early progenitors 
of man, 248 

Foramen, supra-condyloid, exceptio- 
nal occurrence of in the humerus 
of man, 30, 64 ; in the early 
progenitors of man, 243 

Forbes, D., on the Aymara Indians, 
51 ; on local variation of colour 
in the Quichuas, 304 ; on the 
hairlessness of the Aymaras and 
Quichuas, 851, 853 ; on the long 
hair of the Aymaras and Qui- 
chuas, 884 

Forel, F., on white young swans, 
736 

Forester, Hon. 0. W., on an orphan 
hawk, 624 

Formica rufa, size of the cerebral 
ganglia in, 81 

Fossils, absence of, connecting man 
with the apes, 242 

Fowl, occurrence of spurs in the 
female, 351 ; game, early pug- 
nacity of, 369 ; Polish, early 
development of cranial peculiari- 
ties of, 369 ; variations in plu- 
mage of, 589 ; examples of corre- 
lated development in the, 650 ; 
domestic, breeds and sub-breeds 
of, 701 

Fowls, spangled Hamburg, 353, 
368 ; inheritance of changes of 


FOX. 


INDEX. 


GALLIJS. 


981 


plumage by, 363 ; sexual peculi- 
arities in, transmitted only to the 
same sex, 355 ; loss of secondary 
sexual characters by male, 356 ; 
Polish, origin of the crest in, 
356 ; period of inheritance of char- 
acters by, 368 ; cuckoo-, 368 ; 
development of the comb in, 
369 ; numerical proportion of the 
sexes in, 381 ; courtship of, 635 ; 
mongrel, between a black Spanish 
cock and different hens, 651 ; 
pencilled Hamburg, difference of 
the sexes in, 681 ; Spanish, sexual 
differences of the comb in, 681 ; 
spurred, in both sexes, 685 
Fox, W. D., on some half-tamed 
wild ducks becoming polygamous, 
and on polygamy in the guinea- 
fowl and canary-bird, 339 ; on 
the proportion of the sexes in 
cattle, 381 ; on the pugnacity of 
the peacock, 557 ; on a nuptial 
assembly of magpies, 619 ; on 
the finding of new mates by crows, 
621 ; on partridges living in 
triplets, 624 ; on the pairing of 
a goose with a Chinese gander, 
632 

Foxes, wariness of young, in hunt- 
ing districts, 122 ; black, 824 
Fraser, C., on the different colours 
of the sexes in a species of Squilla, 
416 

, G., colours of Theda, 478 

Frere, Hookham, quoting Theognis 
on selection in mankind, 43 
Fringilla cannabina, 600 

dris, age of mature plumage 

in, 738 

cyanea, age of mature plumage 

in, 738 

leucophrys, young of, 741 

spintLS, 633 

tristis, change of colour in, in 

spring, 600 ; young of, 741 
Fringillidae, resemblance of the fe- 
males of distinct species of, 717 
Frog, bright coloured and distaste- 
ful to birds, 535 

Frogs, 534 ; male, temporary re- 
ceptacles for ova possessed by, 
320 ; ready to breed before the 


females, 327 ; fighting of, 535 ; 
vocal organs of, 536 
Frontal bone, persistence of the 
suture in, 58 

Fruits, poisonous, avoided by ani- 
mals, 101 

Fuegians, 204, 221 ; difference of 
stature among the, 46 ; power of 
sight in the, 50 ; skill of, in 
stone- thro wing, 73 ; resistance of 
the, to their severe climate, 95, 
282 ; mental capacity of the, 98 ; 
quasi-religious sentiments of the, 
145 ; resemblance of, in mental 
characters, to Europeans, 276 ; 
mode of life of the, 305 ; aversion 
of, to hair on the face, 884 ; said 
to admire European women, 887 
Fulgoridse, songs of the, 433 
Fur, whiteness of, in artic animals 
in winter, 354 

Fur-bearing animals, acquired sa- 
gacity of, 121 

G. 

Gallicrex, sexual difference in the 
colour of the irides in, 649 

cristatus, pugnacity of male, 

552 ; red carbuncle occurring in 
the male during the breeding- 
season, 693 

Gallinacese, frequency of polyga- 
mous habits and of sexual differ- 
ences in the, 338 ; love-gestures 
of, 580 ; decomposed feathers in, 
587 ; stripes of young, 708 ; 
comparative sexual differences 
between the species of, 718 ; 
plumage of, 720 

Gallinaceous birds, weapons of the 
male, 555 ; racket-shaped feathers 
on the heads of, 587 
Gallinula chloropus, pugnacity of 
the male, 552 

Galloperdix, spurs of, 557 ; deve- 
lopment of spurs in the female, 685 
Gallophasis, young of, 714 
Galls, 91 

Gallus hankiva, 681 ; neck-hackles 
of, 598 

Stanlcyi, pugnacity of the 

male, 555, 556 


982 


G ALTON. 


INDEX. 


GESTURE. 


Galton, Mr., on hereditary genius, 
41 ; gregariousness and independ- 
ence in animals, 159 ; on the 
struggle between the social and 
personal impulses, 191 ; on the 
effects of natural selection on 
civilised nations, 205 ; on the 
sterility of sole daughters, 208 ; 
on the degree of fertility of 
' people of genius, 210 ; on the 
early marriages of the poor, 212 ; 
on the ancient Greeks, 216 ; on 
the Middle Ages, 217 ; on the 
progress of the United States, 
218 ; on South African notions 
of beauty, 883 

Gammarufi, use of the chelae of, 412 

marinus, 414 

Gan nets, white only when mature, 
751 

Ganoid fishes,* 245, 255 
Gaour, horns of the, 772 
Gap between man and the apes, 241 
Gaper, sexes and young of, 741 
Gardner, on an example of ration- 
ality in a Gelasimus, 415 
Garrulus ijlandarius, 621 
Gartner, on sterility of hybrid 
plants, 267 

Gasteropoda, 404 ; pulmoniferous, 
courtship of, 404 

Gasterosteus, 340 ; nidifi cation of, 
528 

leiurus, 509, 521, 528 

trachurus, 509 

Gastrophora, wings of, brightly 
coloured beneath, 483 
Gauchos, want of humanity among 
the, 188 

Gaudry, M., on a fossil monkey, 
237 

Gavia^ seasonal change of plumage 
in, 751 

Geese, clanging noise made by, 
563 ; pairing of different species 
of, 632 ; Canada, selection of 
mates by, 632, 635 
Gegenbaur, C., on the number of 
digits in the Ichthyo pterygia, 55 ; 
on the hermaphroditism of the 
remote progenitors of the verte- 
brata, 219 ; two types of nipple 
in mammals, 251 


Gelasimus, proportions of the sexes 
in a species of, 392 ; use of the 
enlarged chelae of the male, 412 ; 
pugnacity of males of, 414 ; 
rational actions of a, 415 ; dif- 
ference of colour in the sexes of 
a species of, 417 

Gemniules, dormant in one sex, 357 

Genius, 41 ; hereditary, 859, 860 

, fertility of men and women 

of, 210 

Geott'roy-Saint-Hilaire, Isid., on the 
recognition of women by male 
quadrumana, 11 ; on monstrosi- 
ties, 44 ; coincidences of arrested 
development with polydactylism, 
56 ; on animal-like anomalies in 
the human structure, 59 ; on the 
correlation of monstrosities, 65 ; 
on the distribution of hair in 
man and monkeys, 86 ; on the 
caudal vertebrje of monkeys, 87 ; 
on correlated variability, 91 ; on 
the classification of man, 226 ; on 
the long hair on the heads of 
species of Semnopithecus, 232 ; 
on the hair in monkeys, 234 ; 
on the development of horns in 
female deer, 769 ; and F. Cuvier, 
on the mandrill, 822 ; on Hylo- 
bates, 849, 851 

Geographical distribution, as evi- 
dence of specific distinctions in 
man, 261 

Geometry, brightly coloured be- 
neath, 483 

Geophagus, frontal protuberance of, 
male, 520, 529 ; eggs hatched by 
the male, in the mouth or bran- 
chial cavity, 529 

Georgia, change of colour in Ger- 
mans settled in, 304 

Geotrupes, stridulation of, 464, 466 

Gerbe, M., on the nest-building of 
Crenilabus massa and C. melops, 
528 

Gerland, Dr., on the prevalence of 
infanticide, 179, 880, 902, 903 ; 
on the extinction of races, 282 

Gervais, R, on the hairiness of the 
gorilla, 86 ; on the mandrill, 
822 

Gesture-language, 277 


GHOST-MOTH. 


INDEX. 


GOULT). 


983 


Ghost-moth, sexual difference of 
colour in the, 484 
Giard, M., disputes descent of ver- 
tebrates from Ascidians, 247 ; 
colour of sponges and Ascidians, 
402 ; musky odour of Sphinx, 
472 

Gibbon, voice of, 804, 864 
Gibbon, Hoolock, nose of, 232 
Gibbs, Sir D. , on differences of the 
voice in different races of men, 
862 

Gill, Dr., male seals larger than 
females, 337 ; sexual differences 
in seals, 787 

Giraffe, its mode of using the horns, 
777 ; mute, except in the rutting 
season, 802 

Giraud-Teulon, on the cause of 
short sight, 60 

Glanders, communicable to man 
from the lower animals, 9 
Glands, odoriferous, in mammals, 
807, 808 

Glareola, double moult in, 594 
Olomeris limbata^ diH'erence of 
colour in the sexes of, 421 
Glow-worm, female, apterous, 321 ; 

luminosity of the, 427 
Gnats, dances of, 431 ; auditory 
powers of, 866 

Gnu, skeletons of, found locked 
together, 764 ; sexual differences 
in the colour of the, 818 
Goat, male, wild, falling on his 
horns, 775 ; male, odour emitted 
by, 807 ; male, wild, crest of the, 
811 ; Berbura, mane, dewlap, 
&c., of the male, 813 ; Kemas, 
sexual difference in the colour of 
the, 818 

Goats, sexual differences in the 
horns of, 355 ; horns of, 362, 
771 ; mode of fighting of, 776 ; 
domestic, sexual differences of, 
late developed, 367 ; beards of, 
811 

Goatsucker, Virginian, pairing of 
the, 561 

Gobies, nidification of, 528 
God, want of the idea of, in some 
races of men, 143 

Godron, M., on variability, 44 5 on 1 


difference of stature, 46 ; on the 
want of connexion between 
climate and the colour of the 
skin, 298 ; on the colour of the 
skin, 306 ; on the colour of 
infants, 849 

Goldfinch, 568, 600 ; ])roportion of 
the sexes in the, 383 ; sexual 
differences of the beak in the, 
551 ; courtship of the, 611 

, North American, young of, 

740 

Goldfish, 524, 525 
Gomphus, proportions of the sexes 
in, 391 ; difference in the sexes 
of, 445 

Gonepteryx Rhamni, 478 ; sexual 
difference of colour in, 494 
Goodsir, Prof., on the affinity of 
the lancelet to the ascidians, 246 
Goosander, young of, 713 
Goose, Antarctic, colours of the, 
750 

, Canada, pairing with a Ber- 

nicle gander, 632 

, Chinese, knob on the beak 

of the, 650 

, Egyptian, 558 

, Sebastopol, plumage of, 589 

, Snow-, whiteness of the, 751 

, Spur-winged, 558 

Gorilla, 854 ; semi-erect attitude 
of the, 78 ; mastoid processes of 
the, 79 ; protecting himself from 
rain with his hands, 234 ; manner 
of sitting, 234 ; supposed to be a 
kind of mandrill, 274 ; polygamy 
of the, 334, 900, 901 ; voice of 
the, 804 ; cranium of, 849 ; 
fighting of male, 855 
Gosse, P. H., on the pugnacity of 
the male Humming-bird, 551 
, M., on the inheritance of arti- 
ficial modifications of the skull, 
921 

Gould, B. A., on variation in the 
length of the legs in man, 38 ; 
measurements of American sol- 
diers, 45, 48 ; on the proportions 
of the body and capacity of the 
lungs in different races of men, 
259 ; on the inferior vitality of 
mulattoes, 265 


984 


GOULD. 


INDEX. 


GROUSE. 


Gould, J.,* on migration of swifts, 
165 ; on the arrival of male 
snipes before the females, 327 ; 
on the numerical proportion of 
the sexes in birds, 382 ; on 
Neomorpha Grypus, 550 ; on the 
species of Eustephanus, 550 ; on 
the Australian musk-duck, 549, 
550 ; on the relative size of the 
sexes in Brizmra lohata and 
Cincloramphios cruralis, 554 ; on 
Lohivanellus lohatus, 560 ; on 
habits of Menura Alberti^ 567, 
568 ; on the rarity of song in 
brilliant birds, 568 ; on Selas- 
phorus platycerus, 577 ; on the 
Bower-birds, 583, 616 ; on the 
ornamental plumage of the Hum- 
ming-birds, 591 ; on the moulting 
of the ptarmigan, 597 ; on the 
display of plumage by the male 
Humming-birds, 601 ; on the 
shyness of adorned male birds, 
613 ; on the decoration of the 
bowers of Bower-birds, 630 ; 
on the decoration of their nest 
by Humming-birds, 630 ; on 
variation in the genus Gynan- 
thus, 646 ; on the colour of 
the thighs in a male parrakeet, 
646 ; on Urosticte Benjamini, 
673 et seq. ; on the nidification 
of the Orioles, 691 ; on ob- 
scurely-coloured birds building 
concealed nests, 692 ; on tro- 
gons and king-fishers, 696 ; on 
Australian parrots, 698 ; on 
Australian pigeons, 699 ; on the 
moulting of the ptarmigan, 705 ; 
on the immature plumage of 
birds, 711 et seq. ; on the Aus- 
tralian species of Turnix, 726 ; 
on the young of AUhurus polyt- 
mus, 743 ; on the colours of the 
bills of toucans, 750 ; on the 
relative size of the sexes in the 
marsupials of Australia, 787 ; on 
the colours of the Marsupials, 
814 

Goureaux, on the stridulation of 
Mutilla europcea, 450 

Gout, sexually transmitted, 366 

Graba, on the Pied Eavens of tlie 


Feroc Islands, 647 ; variety of 
the Guillemot, 647 
Gradation of secondary sexual char- 
acters in birds, 655 
Grallatores, absence of secondary 
sexual characters in, 339 ; double 
moult in some, 594 
Grallina, nidification of, 692 
Grasshoppers, stridulation of the, 
440 

Gratiolet, Prof., on the anthropo- 
morphous apes, 237 ; on the 
evolution of the anthropomor- 
phous apes, 274 ; on the differ- 
ence in the development of the 
brains of apes and of man, 314 
Gray, Asa, on the gradation of spe- 
cies among the Compositae, 271 

, J. E., on the caudal vertebrae 

of monkeys, 87 ; on the presence 
of rudiments of horns in the 
female of Cervulus moschatus, 
769 ; on the horns of goats and 
sheep, 771 ; on crests of male 
antelopes, 810 ; on the beard of 
the ibex, 811 ; on the Berbura 
goat, 813 ; on sexual differences 
in the coloration of Rodents, 814 ; 
ornaments of male sloth, 815 ; on 
the colours of the Elands, 817 ; 
on the Sing-sing antelope, 818 ; 
on the colours of goats, 819 ; on 
Lemur Macaco, 819 ; on the hog- 
deer, 833. 

‘ ‘ Greatest happiness principle, ”183, 
184 

Greeks, ancient, 216 
Green, A. H., on beavers fighting, 
763 ; on the voice of the beaver, 
805 

Greenfinch, selected by a female 
canary, 633 

Greg, W. E. , on the effects of natural 
selection on civilised nations, 205 ; 
on the early marriages of the poor, 
212 ; on the Ancient Greeks, 216 
Grenadiers, Prussian, 42 
Greyhounds, numerical proportion 
of the sexes in, 332, 333 ; nu- 
merical proportion of male and 
female births in, 379, 397 
Grouse, red, monogamous, 338 ; 
pugnacity of young male, 560 ; 


GRUBER. 


INDEX. 


HAIR. 


985 


producing a sound by beating 
their wings together, 674 ; dura- 
tion of courtship of, 617 ; colours 
and nidification of, 694 
Gniber, Dr., on the occurrence 
of the supra-condyloid foramen 
in the humerus of man, 30 ; 
on division of malar bone, 58 ; 
stridulation of locust, 436 ; on 
ephippiger, 442 

Gms ainericanus, age of mature 
plumage in, 738 ; breeding in 
immature plumage, 233 

Virgo, trachea of, 572 

Gryllus campestris, 436 ; pugnacity 
of male, 443 

domestieus, 436 

Grypus, sexual differences in the 
beak in, 550 

Guanacoes, battles of, 763 ; canine 
teeth of, 784 

Guanas, strife for women among 
the, 855 ; polyandry among the, 
904 

Guanche skeletons, occurrence of 
the supra-condyloid foramen in 
the humerus of, 32 
Guaranys, proportion of men and 
women among, 377 ; colour of 
new-born children of the, 848 ; 
beards of the, 853 
Guen6e, A., on the sexes of Hypery- 
thra, 386 

Guilding, L., on the stridulation of 
the Locustidce, 435 
Guillemot, variety of the, 647 
Guinea, sheep of, with males only 
horned, 363 

Guinea-fowl, monogamous, 338 ; 
occasional polygamy of the, 339 ; 
markings of the, 654 
Guinea-pigs, inheritance of the 
effects of operations by, 90 
Gulls, seasonal change of plumage 
in, 751 ; white, 751 
Gunther, Dr., on paddle of Cera- 
todus, 55 ; on hermaphroditism 
in Serranus, 250 ; on male fishes 
hatching ova in their mouths, 
251, 529 ; on mistaking infertile 
female fishes for males, 384 ; on 
the prehensile organs of male 
Plagiostomous fishes, 607 ; spines | 


and brushes on fishes, 508 ; on 
the pugnacity of the male salmon 
and trout, 510 ; on the relative 
size of the sexes in fishes, 514 ; 
on sexual differences in fishes, 515 
et seq. ; on the genus Calliony- 
mus, 515 ; on a protective resem- 
blance of a pipe-fish, 627 ; on 
the genus Solenostoma, 530 ; on 
the coloration of frogs and toads, 
635 ; combat of Testudo elegans, 
537 ; on the sexual differences in 
the Ophidia, 538 ; on differences 
of the sexes of lizards, 542 et seq. 

Gynanisa Isis, ocellated spots of, 
652 

Gypsies, uniformity of, in various 
parts of the world, 299 

H 

Habits, bad, facilitated, by fami- 
liarity, 188 ; variability of the 
force of, 192 

Hacked, E., on the origin of man, 
4 ; on rudimentary characters, 
15 ; on death caused by inflamma- 
tion of the vermiform appendage, 
30 ; on the canine teeth in man, 
59 ; on the steps by which man 
became a biped, 77 ; on man as 
a member of the Catarrhine group, 
239 ; on the position of the 
Lemuridse, 243 ; on the genea- 
logy of the Mammalia, 244 ; on 
the lancelet, 246 ; on the trans- 
parency of pelagic animals, 402 ; 
on the musical powers of women, 
873 

Hagen, H., and Walsh, B. D., on 
American Neuroptera, 391 

Hair, development of, in man, 
26 ; character of, supposed to be 
determined by light and heat, 
47 ; distribution of, in man, 
85, 916 ; possibly removed for 
ornamental purposes ; 86 ; ar- 
rangement and direction of, 
233 ; of the early progenitors of 
man, 248 ; different texture of, 
in distinct races, 259 ; and 
skin, correlation of colour of, 
306 ; development of, in mam- 


986 


HAIRINESS. 


INDEX. 


HEMIITEUA. 


mals, 809 ; management of, 
among dilfereut peoples, 875 ; 
great length of, in some North 
American tribes, 884 ; elonga- 
tion of the, on the human head, 
921 ; possible inherited effect of 
plucking out, 921 

Hairiness, difference of, in the sexes 
in man, 850 ; variation of, in 
^ races of men, 850 
Hairs and excretory pores, nume- 
rical relation of, in sheep, 306 
Hairy family, Siamese, 918 
Halbertsma, Prof. , hermaphroditism 
in Serranus, 250 

Hamadryas baboon, turning over 
stones, 154 ; mane of the male, 
795 

Hamilton, C., on the cruelty of the 
Kaffirs to animals, 180 ; on the 
engrossment of the women by the 
Kaffir chiefs, 908 
Hammering, difficulty of, 73 
Hancock, A., on the colours of 
the nudibranch Mollusca, 403, 
406 

Hands, larger at birth, in the chil- 
dren of labourers, 49 ; structure 
of, in the quadrumana, 75 ; and 
arms, freedom of, indirectly cor- 
related with diminution of ca- 
nines, 80 

Handwriting, inherited, 135 
Haiidyside, Dr., supernumerary 
mammae in men, 55 
Harcourt, E. Vernon, on Fringilla 
cannahina^ 600 

Hare, protective colouring of the, 
827 

Harelda glacialis, 641 
Hares, battles of male, 763 
Harlan, Dr. , on the difference be- 
tween field- and house-slaves, 304 
Harris, J. M., on the relation of 
complexion to climate, 302 

, T. W., on the Katy-did locust, 

435 ; on the stridulation of the 
grasshoppers, 440 ; on (FiCanthus 
ni calls, 444 ; on the colouring 
of Lepidoptera, 481 ; on the 
colouring of Saturnia lo, 48 1 
Harting, spur of the Ornithorhyn- 
chus, 767 


Plartman, Dr., on the singing of 
Cicada septcndecim, 433 
Hatred, persistence of, 172 
Haughton, S., on a variation of 
the flexor pollids longus in man, 
63 

Hawks, feeding orphan nestling, 
624 

Hayes, Dr., on the diverging of 
sledge-dogs on thin ice, 114 
Haymond, K., on the drumming of 
the male Tetrao umhcllus, 574 ; 
on the drumming of birds, 
574 

Head, altered position of, to suit 
the erect attitude of man, 83 ; 
hairiness of, in man, 85 ; pro- 
cesses of, in male beetles, 453 ; 
artificial alterations of the form 
of the, 888 

Hearne, on strife for women among 
the North American Indians, 
855 ; on the North American In- 
dians’ notion of female beauty, 
880 ; repeated elopements of a 
North American woman, 912 
Heart, in the human embryo, 
13 

Heat, supposed effects of, 4? 
Hectocotyle, 405 

Hedge-warbler, 722 ; young of tne, 
735 

Heel, small projection of, in the 
Aymara Indians, 51 
Hegt, M., on the development of 
the spurs in peacocks, 364 
Heliconidse, 472 ; mimicry of, by 
other butterflies, 495 
Heliopathes, stridulation peculiar to 
the male, 467 

Heliothrix auriculata, young of, 
713, 714 

Helix pomatia, example of indivi- 
dual attacliment in, 404 
liellins, J., proportions of sexes of 
Lepidoptera reared by, 389 
Helmholtz, on pleasure derived 
from liarmonies, 141 ; on the 
human eye, 672; on the vibra- 
tion of the auditory hairs of 
Crustacea, 866 ; the pliysiology 
of harmony, 866 
Hemiptera, 431 


HEMITRAGUS. 


INDEX. 


HORNS. 


987 


Hemitragiis, beardless in both sexes, 
811 

Henisbacb, M. von, on medial 
mamma in man, 55 
Hen, clucking of, 563 
Hepburn, Mr., on the autumn song 
of the water-ouzel, 566 
Hepialus humuU, sexual ditlerence 
of colour in the, 485 
Herbs, poisonous, avoided by ani- 
mals, 101 

Hermaphroditism, of embryos, 249 ; 
in fishes, 250 

Herodias huhulcus, vernal moult of, 
598 

Heron, Sir R., on the habits of pea- 
fowl, 638, 640, 674 
Herons, love-gestures of, 580 ; 
decomposed feathers in, 587 ; 
breeding plumage of, 595, 597 ; 
young of the, 734, 741 ; some- 
times dimorphic. 739 ; con- 
tinued growth of crest and 
plumes in the males of some, 
740 ; change of colour in some, 
763 

Hesperomys cognatm, 865 
Hetcerina, proportion of the sexes 
in, 391 ; difference in the sexes 
of, 445 

fTeterocerm, stridulation of, 463 
Hewitt, Mr., on a game-cock kill- 
ing a kite, 555 ; on the recogni- 
tion of dogs and cats by ducks, 
628 ; on the pairing of a wild 
duck with a pintail drake, 
632 ; on the courtship of fowls, 
635 ; on the coupling of phea- 
sants with common hens, 641 
Hilgendorf, sounds produced by 
crustaceans, 421 

Hindoo, his horror of breaking his 
caste, 186, 190 

Hindoos, local difference of stature 
among, 46 ; difference of, from 
Europeans, 297 ; colour of the 
beard in, 850 

Hipparchia Janira, 488 , instabi- 
lity of the ocellated spots of, 
653 

TTippocampus, development of, 251 ; 
marsupial receptacles of the male. 
530 


Hippocampus minor ^ 309, 313 
Hippopotamus, nakedness of, 85 
Hips, proportions of, in soldiers and 
sailors, 48 

Hodgson, S., on tlie sense of duty, 
149 

Hoff'berg, on the horns of the rein- 
deer, 769 ; on sexual preferences 
shown by reindeer, 801 
Hoffman, Prof., protective colours, 
432 ; fighting of frogs, 535 
Hog, wart-, 793 ; river-, 794 
Hog-deer, 833 

Holland, Sir H., on the effects of 
new diseases, 283 

Homologous structures, correlated 
variation of, 65 

Homoptera, 432 ; stridulation of 
the, and Orthoptera, discussed, 
443 

Honduras, Qaiscalus major in, 383 
Honey-buzzard of India, variation 
in the crest of, 646 
Honey-sucker, females and young 
of, 714 

Honey-suckers, moulting of the, 
597 ; Australian, nidification of, 
692 

Honour, law of, 186 
Hooker, Dr., forbearance of elephant 
to his keeper, 158 ; on the colour 
of the beard in man, 850 
Hookham, Mr., on mental concepts 
in animals, 127 
Hoolock Gibbon, nose of, 232 
Hoopoe, 568 ; sounds produced by 
male, 575 

Hoplopterus armatus, wing-spurs 
of, 560 

Hornbill, African, inflation of the 
neck-wattle of the male during 
courtship, 584 

Hornbills, se.’fual difference in the 
colour of the eyes in, 649 ; 
nidification and incubation of, 
692 

Horne, C., on the rejection of a 
brightly- coloured locust by li- 
* zards and birds, 444 
’ Horns, sexual differences of, in 
; sheep and goats, 355 ; loss of, 

' in female merino sheep, 356 ; 
I development of, in deer, 361 ; 


988 


HORSE. 


INDEX. 


HTJSS. 


development in antelopes, 362 ; 
from the head and thorax, in 
male beetles, 455 ; of deer, 767, 
772, 786 ; originally a masculine 
character in sheep, 771 ; and 
canine teeth, inverse develop- 
ment of, 784 

Horse, fossil, extinction of the, in 
South America, 297 ; polyga- 
mous, 335 ; canine teeth of male, 

' 766 ; winter change of colour, 
828 

Horses, rapid increase of, in South 
America, 70; diminution of 
canine teeth in, 80 ; dreaming, 
113 ; of the Falkland Islands 
and Pampas, 280 ; numerical 
proportion of the sexes, in, 332, 
333 ; lighter in winter in Siberia, 
354 ; sexual preferences in, 800 ; 
pairing preferently with those of 
the same colour, 825 ; numerical 
proportion of male and female 
births in, 379 ; formerly striped, 
835 

Hottentot women, peculiarities of, 
269 

Hottentots, Hce of, 263 ; readily 
become musicians, 868 ; notions 
of female beauty of the, 881 ; 
compression of nose by, 888 

Hough, Dr. S., men’s temperature 
more variable than women’s, 
345 ; proportion of sexes in man, 
375 

House-slaves, difference of, from 
field-slaves, 305 

Houzeau, on the baying of the dog, 
113 ; on reason in dogs, 114 ; 
birds killed by telegraph wires, 
122 ; on the cries of domestic 
fowls and parrots, 129, 133 ; 
animals feel no pity, 156 ; sui- 
cide in the Aleuthian Islands, 
179 

Howorth, H. H. , extinction of sav- 
ages, 284 

Huber, P., on ants playing together, 
104 ; on memory in ants, 112 ; 
on the intercommunication of 
ants, 136 ; on the recognition of 
each other by ants after separa- 
tion, 448 


Hue, on Chinese opinions of the 
appearance of Europeans, 880 
Huia, the, of New Zealand, 321 
Human, man, classed alone in a, 
kingdom, 226 

sacrifices, 116 

Humanity, unknown among some 
savages, 180 ; deficiency of, among 
savages, 188 

Humboldt, A. von, on the ration- 
ality of mules, 119 ; on a parrot 
preserving the language of a lost 
tribe, 281 ; on the cosmetic arts 
of savages, 874 ; on the exaggera- 
tion of natural characters by man, 
887 ; on the red painting of Ameri- 
can Indians, 889 

Hume, D., on sympathetic feelings, 
166 

Humming-bird, racket-shaped fea- 
thers in the tail of a, 586 ; dis- 
play of plumage by the male, 601 
Humming-birds, ornament their 
nests, 140, 630 ; polygamous, 
338 ; proportion of the sexes in, 
383, 744 ; sexual differences in, 
550, 674 ; pugnacity ofmale, 551 ; 
modified primaries of male, 577 ; 
coloration of the sexes of, 591 ; 
display by, 675 ; nidification of 
the, 691, 692 ; colours of female, 
691 ; young of, 237 
Humour, sense of, in dogs, 743 
Humphreys, H. N., on the habits 
of the stickleback, 340, 509 
Hunger, instinct of, 172 
Huns, ancient, flattening of the 
nose by the, 888 

Hunter, J., on the number of species 
of man, 270 ; on secondary sexual 
characters, 319 ; on the general 
behaviour of female animals dur- 
ing courtship, 342 ; on the muscles 
of the larynx in song-birds, 567 ; 
on strength of males, 787 ; on the 
curled frontal hair of the bull, 
811 ; on the rejection of an ass 
by a female zebra, 825 
Hunter, W. W. , on the recent rapid 
increase of the San tali, 68 ; on the 
Santali, 297 

Huss, Ur. Max, on mammary glands, 
250 


HUSSEY. 


INDEX. 


IMMATURE. 


989 


Hussey, Mr., on a partridge distin- 
guishing persons, 628 
Hutchinson, Col., example of rea- 
soning in a retriever, 119 
Hutton, Capt., on the male wild 
goat falling on his horns, 775 
Huxley, T. H., on the structural 
agreement of man with the apes, 
3 ; on the agreement of the brain 
in man with that of lower ani- 
mals, 8 ; on the adult age of the 
orang, 11 ; on the embryonic 
development of man, 12 ; on the 
origin of man, 4, 15 ; on varia- 
tion in the skulls of the natives 
of Australia, 39 ; on the abductor 
of the fifth metatarsal in apes, 62 ; 
on the nature of the reasoning 
power, 117 ; on the position of 
man, 231 ; on the suborders of 
primates, 235 ; on the Lemuridae, 
243 ; on the Dinosauria, 245 ; on 
the amphibian affinities of the 
Ichthyosaurians, 245 ; on vari- 
ability of the skull in certain 
races of man, 270 ; on the races 
of man, 273 ; supplement on the 
brain, 309 

Hybrid birds, production of, 631 
Hydrophobia, communicable be- 
tween man and the lower ani- 
mals, 9 

Hydropoms, dimorphism of females 
of, 424 

Hyelaphus porciniLS^ 833 
Hygrogonus^ 529 
Hyla, singing species of, 536 
Hylohates, absence of the thumb in, 
76 ; upright progression of some 
species of, 78 ; maternal affection 
in a, 106 ; direction of the hair 
on the arms of species of, 233 ; 
females of, less hairy below than 
males, 851 

agilis, 76 ; hair on the arms 

of, 233 ; musical voice of the, 
805 ; superciliary ridge of, 849 ; 
voice of, 864 

Hylohates hoolock, sexual difference 
of colour in, 820 

lar, 76; hair on the arms 

of, 233 ; female less hairy, 851 
leuciscus, 76 ; song of, 864 


Hylohates syndactylus, 76 ; laryngeal 
sac of, 804 

Hyloph ila prasinana, 471 
Hymonoptera, 447 ; large size of 
the cerebral ganglia in, 81 ; 
classification of, 228 ; sexual 
differences in the wings of, 426 ; 
aculeate, relative size of the sexes 
of, 429 

Hymenopteron, parasitic, with a 
sedentary male, 342 
Hyomoschus aquaticus, 834 
Hyperythra, proportion of the sexes 
in, 386 

Hypogymna dispar, sexual differ- 
ence of colour in, 484 
Hypopyra, coloration of, 483 

I. 

Ibex, male, falling on his horns, 
775 ; beard of the, 811 
Ibis, white, change of colour of 
naked skin in, during the breed- 
ing season, 593 ; scarlet, young 
of the, 734 

tantalus, age of mature plum- 
age in, 738 ; breeding in im- 
mature plumage, 739 
Ibises, decomposed feathers in, 
587 ; white, 751 ; and black, 
752 

Ichneumonidse, difference of the 
sexes in, 448 
Ichthyopterygia, 65 
Ichthyosaurians, 245 
Idiots, microcephalous, theircharac- 
ters and habits, 53 ; hairiness 
and animal nature of their ac- 
tions, 54 ; microcephalous, imi- 
tative faculties of, 133 
Iguana tuherculata, 543 
Iguanas, 543 

Illegitimate and legitimate chil- 
dren, proportion of the sexes in, 
377 

Imagination, existence of, in ani- 
mals, 113 

Imitation, 104; of man by monkeys, 
110 ; tendency to, in monkeys, 
microcephalous idiots and sav- 
ages, 133 ; influence of, 198 
Immature plumage of birds, 707, 711 


990 


IMPLACENTATA. 


INDEX. 


JAEGER. 


Implacentata, 243 
Implements, employed by monkeys, 
123 ; fashioning of, peculiar to 
man, 125 

Impregnation, period of, influence 
of, upon sex, 378 

Improvement, progressive, man 
alone supposed to be capable of, 
121 

Incisor teeth, knocked out or filed 
'by some savages, 876 
Increase, rate of, 66 ; necessity of 
checks in, 70 

Indecency, hatred of, a modern 
virtue, 182 

India, difficulty of distinguishing 
the native races of, 258 ; Cy- 
prinidse of, 526 ; colour of the 
beard in races of men of, 850 
Indian, North American, honoured 
for scalping a man of another 
tribe, 179 

Individuality, in animals, 126 
Indolence of man, when free from 
a struggle for existence, 220 
Indopicm carlotta, colours of the 
sexes of, 698 

Infanticide, prevalence of, 69, 179, 
394, 396 ; supposed cause of, 
880 ; prevalence and causes of, 
902 et seq. 

Inferiority, supposed physical, of 
man, 96 

Inflammation of the bowels, occur- 
rence of, in Cebus Azarce, 9 
• Inheritance, 41 ; of long and short 
sight, 49 ; of effects of use of 
vocal and mental organs, 134 ; 
of moral tendencies, 188, 194 ; 
laws of, 350 ; sexual, 358 ; 
sexually limited, 677 
Inquisition, influence of the, 216 
Insanity, hereditary, 41 
Insect, fossil, from the Devonian, 
443 

Insectivora, 815 ; absence of second- 
ary sexual characters in, 336 
Insects, relative size of the cerebral 
ganglia in, 81 ; male, appearance 
of, before the females, 327 ; pur- 
suit of female, by the males, 341 ; 
period of development of sexual 
characters in, 365 ; secondary 


sexual characters of, 422 ; kept 
in cages, 433, 444 ; stridulatioii, 
862 

Iiisessores, vocal organs of, 567 
Instep, depth of, in soldiers and 
sailors, 48 

Instinct and intelligence, 101 

, migratory, vanquishing the 

maternal, 164, 173 
Instinctive actions, the result of in- 
heritance, 160 

impulses, difference of the 

force, 169 et seq. ; and moral im- 
pulses, alUance of, 170 
Instincts, 100 ; complex origin of, 
through natural selection, 102 ; 
possible origin of some, 102 ; 
acquired, of domestic animals, 
160; variability of the force of, 
164 ; difference of force between 
the social and other, 170, 194 ; 
utilised for new purposes, 869 
Instrumental music of birds, 573, 
578 

Intellect, influence of, in natural 
selection in civilised society, 209 
Intellectual faculties, their influence 
on natural selection in man, 195 ; 
probably perfected througli na- 
tural selection, 197 
Intelligence, Mr. H. Spencer on the 
dawn of, 101 

Intemperance, no reproach among 
savages, 183 ; its destructiveness, 
211 

Intoxication in monkeys, 9 
Iphias glaucippe, 479 
Iris, sexual difference in the colour 
of the, in birds, 584, 649 
Ischio-pubic muscle, 61, 

Ithaginis cruentus, number of spurs 
in, 557 

lulus, tarsal suckei-s of the males of, 
421 

J. 

Jackals learning from dogs to bark, 
110 

Jack-snipe, coloration of the, 242 
Jacquinot, on the number of species 
of man, 270 

Jaeger, Dr., length of bones in- 
creased from carrying weights, 


JAGUARS. 


INDEX. 


JONES. 


991 


47 ; on the difficulty of approach- 
ing herds of wild animals, 153 ; 
male Silver- pheasant, rejected 
when his plumage was spoilt, 
639 

Jaguars, black, 823 

Janson, E. W., on the proportions 
of the sexes in Tomicus villosus, 
390 ; on stridulant beetles, 
463 

Japan, encouragment of licentious- 
ness in, 69 

Japanese, general beardlessness of 
the, 852 ; aversion of the, to 
whiskers, 885 

Jardine, Sir W., on the Argus phea- 
sant, 586, 614 

Jarrold, Dr., on modifications of 
the skull induced by unnatural 
position, 83 

Jarves, Mr., on infanticide in the 
Sandwich Islands, 396 

Javans, relative height of the sexes 
of, 8M ; notions of female beauty, 
883 

Jaw, influence of the muscles of 
the, upon the physiognomy of 
the apes, 80 

Jaws, smaller proportionately to the 
extremities, 49 ; influence of food 
upon the size of, 49 ; diminution 
of, in man, 80 ; in man, reduced 
by correlation, 856 

Jay, young of the, 735 ; Canada, 
young of the, 735 

Jays, new mates found by, 621 ; 
distinguishing pemons, 628 

Jeffreys, J. Gwyn, on the fonn of 
the shell in the sexes of the Gas- 
teropoda, 404 ; on the influence 
of light upon the colours of shells, 
406 

Jelly-fish, bright colours of some, 
401 

Jenner, Dr., on the voice of the 
rook, 573 ; on the finding of new 
mates by magpies, 621 ; on re- 
tardation of the generative func- 
tions in birds, 624 

Jenyns, L., on the desertion of 
tlieir young by swallows, 163 ; on 
male birds singing after the pro- 
l)cr season, 624 


Jerdon, Dr., on bii’ds dreandng, 
113 ; on the pugnacity of the 
male bulbul, 552 ; on the pug- 
nacity of the male Ortygornis 
gularis, 556 ; on the spurs of 
Galloperdix, 557, 558 ; on the 
habits of Lobivanellus, 560 ; on 
the spoonbill, 572 ; on the drum- 
ming of the Kalij -pheasant, 574, 
575 ; on Indian bustards, 577 ; 
on Otis hengaleTisis, 581 ; on the 
ear-tufts of Sypheotides auritus, 
587 ; on the double moults of 
certain birds, 596 ; on the moult- 
ing of the honeysuckers, 597 ; on 
the moulting of bustards, plovers, 
and drongos, 598 ; on the spring 
change of colour in some finches, 

600 ; on display in male birds, 

601 ; on the ^splay of the under- 
tail coverts by the male bulbul, 
612 ; on the Indian honey-buzzard, 
649 ; on sexual differences in the 
colour of the eyes of hornbills, 
649 ; on the markings of the 
Tragopan pheasant, 653 ; on the 
nidification of the Orioles, 691 ; 
on the nidification of the horn- 
bills, 692 ; on the Sultan yellow- 
tit, 698 ; on Palccornis javanicus, 
703, 704; on the immature plu- 
mage of birds, 709 et seq. ; on 
representative species of birds, 
714 ; on the habits of Turnix, 
726, 727 ; on the continued in- 
crease of beauty of the peacock, 
740 ; on coloration in the genus 
Palceornis, 753 

Jevons, W. S., on the migrations of 
man, 71 

Jews, ancient use of flint tools by 
the, 224 ; uniformity of, in va- 
rious parts of the world, 299 ; 
numerical proportion of male and 
female births among the, 375 ; 
ancient, tattooing practised by, 
369 

Johnstone, Lieut., on the Indian 
elephant, 336 

Jollofs, fine appearance of the, 
895 

Jones, Albert, proportion of sexes of 
Lepidoptera, reared by, 389 


992 


JUAN. 


INDEX. 


KOVALEVSKY. 


Juan Fernandez, humming-birds of, 
743 

Junonia, sexual differences of co- 
louring in species of, 474 
Jupiter, comparison with Assyrian 
effigies, 886 

K. 

Kaffir skull, occurrence of the dia- 
stema in a, 60 

Kaffirs, their cruelty to animals, 
180 ; lice of the, 263 ; colour of 
the, 882 ; engrossment of the 
handsomest women by the chiefs 
of the, 908 ; marriage-customs of 
the, 913 

Kalij -pheasant, drumming of the 
male, 574 ; young of, 714 
Kallima, resemblance of, to a with- 
ered leaf, 477 

Kulmucks, general beardlessness of, 
852 ; aversion of, to hairs on 
the face, 885 ; marriage-customs 
of the, 913 

Kangaroo, gi’eat red, sexual differ- 
ence in the colour of, 814 
Kant, Imm., on duty, 148 ; on self- 
restraint, 168 ; on the number of 
species of man, 270 
Katy-did, stridulation of the, 435 
Keen, Dr. , on the mental powers of 
snakes, 539 

Keller, Dr., on the difficulty of 
fashioning stone implements, 74 
Kent, W. S., elongation of dorsal 
fin of Callionymus lyra, 515 ; 
courtship of Ldbrus mixtus^ 521 ; 
colours and courtship of Cantha- 
rus lineatus, 522 

Kestrels, new mates found by, 
622 

Kidney, one, doing double work in 
disease, 47 

King, W. E,., on the vocal organs 
of Tetrao cupido, 568, 569 ; on 
the drumming of grouse, 575 ; on 
the reindeer, 769 ; on the attrac- 
tion of male deer by the voice of 
the female, 804 

King and Fitzroy, on the marriage - 
customs of the Fuegians, 914 
King-crows, nidification of, 690 


Kingfisher, 568 ; racket-shaped fea- 
thers in the tail of a, 586 
Kingfishers, colours and nidification 
of the, 694, 696, 699 ; immature 
plumage of the, 712, 714 ; young 
of the, 734, 735 

King Lory, 697 ; immature plumage 
of the, 713 

Kingsley, C., on the sounds pro- 
duced by the UmhriTia, 532 
Kirby and Spence, on sexual differ- 
ences in the length of the snout 
in Curculionidse, 321 ; on the 
courtship of insects, 341 ; on the 
elytra of Dytiscus, 424 ; on peculi- 
arities in the legs of male insects, 
425 ; on the relative size of the 
sexes in insects, 429 ; on the 
Fulgoridae, 433 ; on the habits 
of the Termites, 447 ; on differ- 
ence of colour in the sexes of 
beetles, 452 ; on the horns of the 
male lamellicorn beetles, 455 ; 
on hornlike processes in male 
Curculionidse, 459 ; on the pug- 
nacity of the male stag-beetle, 
459 

Kite, killed by a game-cock, 555 
Knot, retention of winter plumage 
by the, 596 

Knox, R., on the semilunar fold, 
24 ; on the occurrence of the 
supra-condyloid foramen in the 
humenis of man, 30 ; on the 
features of the young Memmon, 
261 

Koala, length of the coecum in, 29 
Kobus ellipsiprymnus, proportion of 
the sexes in, 381 

Kolreuter, on the sterility of hybrid 
plants, 267 

Koodoo, development of the horns 
of the, 362 ; markings of the, 830 
Koppen, F. T., on the migratory 
locust, 435 

Koraks, marriage customs of, 913 
Kordofan, protuberances artificially 
produced by natives of, 875 
Korte, on the proportion of sexes in 
locusts, 391 ; Russian locusts, 435 
Kovalevsky, A., on the affinity of 
the Ascidia to the Vertcbrata^ 
246, 247 


KOVALEVSKY. 


INDEX. 


LASIOCAWrA. 


993 


Kovalevsky, W., on the pugnacity 
of the male capercailzie, 556 ; on 
the pairing of the capercailzie, 
561 

Krause, on a convoluted body at bhe 
extremity of the tail in a Macacus 
and a cat, 33 

Kuptfer, Erof., on the afhnity of the 
Ascidia to the Vertebrata, 246 

L. 

Labidocera Dariciiiii, prehensile or- 
gans of the male, 410 
Labrtis, splendid colours of the 
species of, 516 

mixtus, sexual differences in, 

516, 521 
pavo, 524 

bacertilia, sexual differences of, 542 
Lafresnaye, M. de, on birds of para- 
dise, 589 

Lamarck, on the origin of man, 4 
Laniellibranchiata, 403 
Lamellicorn beetles, horn-like pro- 
cesses from the head and thorax 
of, 453, 455 ; influence of sexual 
selection on, 461 

Laniellicornia, stridulation of, 464 
Lamont, Mr., on the tusks of the 
walrus, 766 ; on the use of its 
tusks by the walrus, 784 ; on the 
bladder-nose seal, 806 
Lampornis porphyrurus, colours of 
the female, 691 

Lampyridie, distasteTulto mammals, 
426 

Lancelet, 245, 255 
Landois, H., gnats attracted by 
sound, 431 ; on the production 
of sound by the Cicadic, 433 ; 
on the stridulatiiig organ of the 
crickets, 436 ; on Decticus, 438 ; 
on the stridulatiiig organs of the 
Acridiidie, 440 ; stridulating ap- 
paratus, in Orthoptera, 442 ; on 
the stridulation of Necrophorus, 
462 ; on the stridulant organ of 
Cerambyx heroff, 464 ; on the 
stridulant oi’gan of Gcotrupes, 
464 ; on the stridulating organs 
in the Cleoptera, 446 ; on the 
ticking of Anobium, 469 


Landor, Dr., on remoive for not 
obeying tribal custom, 175 

Language, an art, 131 ; articulate, 
origin of, 132 ; relation of the 
progress of, to the development 
of the brain, 134 ; effects of in- 
heritance in production of, 135 ; 
complex structure of, among bar- 
barous nations, 139 ; natural se- 
lection in, 139 ; gesture, 277 ; 
primeval, 279 ; of a lost tribe 
preserved by a parrot, 281 

Languages, presence of mdiments 
in, 138 ; classification of, 138 ; 
variability of, 138; crossing or 
blending of, 138 ; complexity 
of, no test of perfection or proof 
of special creation, 140 ; resem- 
blance of, evidence of community 
of origin, 229 

and species, identity of evi- 
dence of their gradual develop- 
ment, 137 

Lardus, 704 ; characters of young, 
709 

rufiis, anomalous young of, 

736 

Lankester, E. R., on comparative 
longevity, 205, 209 ; on the 

destructive effects of intemper- 
ance, 211 

Lanugo of the human foetus 27, 915 

Lapponian language, highly arti- 
ficial, 139 

Lark, proportion of the sexes in the, 
383 ; female, singing of the, 566 

Larks, attracted by a mirror, 629, 
630 

Lartet, E., comparison of cranial 
capacities of skulls of recent and 
tertiary mammals, 82 ; on the 
size of the brain in mammals, 
123 ; on Dryopithecus, 240 ; on 
pre-historic flutes, 868 

Laras, seasonal change of plumage 
in, 751 

Larva, luminous, of a Brazilian 
beetle, 427 

Larynx, muscles of the, in song- 
birds, 567 

Lasiocampa quercus, attraction of 
males by the female, 388 ; sexual 
difference of colour in, 484 

S 


994 


LATHAM. 


INDEX. 


LIGHT. 


Latham, R. G., on the migrations 
of man, 71 

Latooka, perforation of the lower 
lip by the women of, 877 
Laurillard, on the abnormal division 
of the malar bone in man, 58 
Lawrence, W., on the superiority of 
savages to Europeans in power 
of sight, 50 ; on the colour of 
s negro infants, 848 ; on the fond- 
ness of savages for ornaments, 
874 ; on beardless races, 885 ; 
on the beauty of the English 
aristocracy, 894 

Layard, E. L., on the instance of 
rationality in a cobra, 539 ; on 
the pugnacity of Gallus Stanleyi, 
555, 556 

Laycock, Dr., on vital periodicity, 

1 0 ; theroid nature of idiots, 54 
Leaves, autumn, tints useless, 403 
Lecky, Mr., on the sense of duty, 
149 ; on suicide, 179 ; on the 
practice of celibacy, 1 82 ; his 
view of the crimes of savages, 
183 ; on the gradual rise of moral- 
ity, 191 

Leconte, J. L., on the stridulant 
organ in the Coprini and Dynas- 
tini, 465 

Lee, H., on the numerical propor- 
tion of the sexes in the trout, 385 
Leg, calf of the, artificially modi- 
fied, 875 

Legitimate and illegitimate chil- 
dren, proportion of the sexes in, 
377 

Legs, variation of the length of the, 
in man, 38 ; proportions of, in 
soldiers and sailors, 48 ; front, 
atrophied in some male butter- 
flies, 426 ; peculiarities of, in 
male insects, 426 

Leguay, on the occurrence of the 
supra-condyloid foramen in the 
humerus of man, 32 
“ Lek ” of the black-cock and caper- 
cailzie, 617 

Lemoine, Albert, on the origin of 
language, 132 

Lemur tuacaco, sexual diflerence of 
colour in, 819 

Lemui idfe, 235 ; ears of the, 22 ; 


variability of the muscles in tlic, 
61 ; position and derivation of 
the, 242 ; their origin, 255 
Lemurs, uterus in the, 56 
Lenguas, disfigurement of the cars 
of the, 876 
Leopards, black, 823 
L(^pidoptera, 470 ; numerical pro- 
portions of the sexes in the, 385 ; 
colouring of, 472 ; ocellated spots 
of, 653 

Lepidosiren, 245, 255 
Leptalides, mimicry of, 498 
Leptorhynchus angustatus, pug- 
nacity of male, 459 
Leptura testacea, difference of colour 
in the sexes, 452 

Leroy, on the wariness of young 
foxes in hunting-districts, 122 ; 
on the desertion of their young by 
swallows, 165 

Leslie, D., marriage customs of 
Kaffirs, 407 

Lesse, valley of the, 32 
Lesson, on the birds of paradise, 
338, 614 ; on the sea-elephant, 
806 

Lessona, M., observations on Serra- 
nus, 250 

Lethrus cephalotes, pugnacity of the 
males of, 456, 460 
Leuciscus phoxinus, 385 
Leuckart, R., on the vesicula pro- 
statica, 34 ; on the influence of 
the age of parents on the sex of 
offspring, 378 

Levator claviculce muscle, 62 
Lihellula depressa, colour of the 
male, 446 

Libellulidse, relative size of the 
sexes of, 428 ; difference in the 
sexes of, 445 

Lice of domestic animals and man, 
263 

Licentiousness a check upon popu- 
lation, 69 ; prevalence of, among 
savages, 182 

Lichtenstein, on Chera progne, 639 
Life, inheritance at corresponding 
periods of, 353, 359 
Light, effects on complexion, 47 ; 
iiiliuence of, upon the colours of 
shells, 405 


LILFORD. 


INDEX. 


LUBBOCK. 


995 


Lilford, Lord, the inifF attracted by 
bright objects, 629 
Limosa lapponictty 729 
Linariay 704 

montanay 383 

Lindsay, Dr. W. L., diseases com- 
municated from animals to man, 
10 ; madness in animals, 120 ; 
the dog considers his master his 
God, 146 

Linnaeus, views of, as to the position 
of man, 230 

Linnet, numerical proportion of the 
sexes in the, 383 ; crimson fore- 
head and breast of the, 600 ; 
courtship of the, 610 
Lion, polygamous, 337 ; mane of 
the, defensive, 794 ; roaring of 
the, 803 

Lions, stripes of young, 708 
Lips, piercing of the, by savages, 
877 

LithdbiuSy prehensile appendages of 
the female, 421 
Lithosia, coloration in, 481 
Littorina littorea, 404 
Livingstone, Dr., manner of sitting 
of gorilla, 234 ; on the influence 
of dampness and dryness on the 
colour of the skin, 299 ; on the 
liability of negroes to tropical 
fevers after residence in a cold 
climate, 300 ; on the spur- 
winged goose, 558 ; on weaver- 
birds, 575 ; on an African night- 
jar, 586, 613, 614 ; on the battle- 
scars of South African male 
mammals, 764 ; on the re- 
moval of the upper incisors by 
the Batokas, 876 ; on the 
perforation of the upper lip by 
the Makalolo, 877 ; on the 
Banyai, 883 

Livonia, numerical proportion of 
male and female births in, 332, 
375 

Lizards, relative size of the sexes 
of, 542 ; gular pouches of, 543 
Lloyd, L., on the polygamy of the 
capercailzie and bustard, 338 ; 
on tlie numerical proportion of the 
sexes in the capercailzie and 
blackcock, 382; on the salmon. 


512 ; on the colours of the sea- 
scorpion, 515, 516 ; on the pug- 
nacity of male grouse, 560 ; on 
the capercailzie and blackcock, 
560, 567 ; on the call of the caper- 
cailzie, 573 ; on assemblages of 
grouse and snipes, 618 ; on the 
pairing of a shield-drake with a 
common duck, 632 ; on the 
battles of seals, 764 ; on the 
elk, 775 

Lohivanellus, wing-spurs in, 558 
Local influences, effect of, upon 
stature, 45 

Lockwood, Mr., on the development 
of HippocampuSy 251 

, Rev. S., musical mouse, 865 

Locust, bright-coloured, rejected by 
lizards and birds, 444 

, migratory, 435 ; selection 

by female, 435 

Locustidse, stridulation of the, 434, 
437 ; descent of the, 439 
Locusts, proportion of sexes in, 
391 ; stridulation of, 427 
Longicorn beetles, difierence of the 
sexes of, in colour, 451 ; stridu- 
lation of, 464 

Lonsdale, Mr., on an example of 
personal attachment in Helix 
pomatia, 404 

Lophobranchii, marsupial recep- 
tacles of the male, 530 
LophophoruSy habits of, 640 
Lophorina atra, sexual difference in 
coloration of, 749 
Lophornis ornatuSy 590 
Lord, J. K., on Salmo lycaodoiiy 
511 

Lory, King, 191 ; immature plu- 
mage of the, 713 
Lory, king, constancy of, 626 
Love-antics and dances of birds, 
580 

Lowne, B. T., on Musca vomitoriay 
81, 431 

Loxitty characters of young of, 708 
Lubbock, Sir J., on the antiquity 
of man, 3 ; on the origin of 
man, 4 ; on the mental capacity 
of savages, 98 ; on the origin of 
implements, 125 ; on the sim- 
plification of languages, 1 40 ; 


096 


LUCAN I . 


INDEX. 


W'CLELLAND. 


on the absence of the idea of 
God among certain races of men, 
143 ; on the origin of the belief 
in spiritual agencies, 144 ; on 
superstitions, 147 ; on the sense 
of duty, 149 ; on the practice of 
burying the old and sick among 
the Fijians, 156 ; on the immo- 
rality of savages, 183 ; on Mr. 

^ Wallace’s claim to the origination 
of the idea of natural selection, 
73 ; on the former barbarism 
of civilised nations, 221 ; on 
improvements in the arts among 
savages, 223 ; on resemblances 
of the mental characters in dif- 
ferent races of men, 276 ; on the 
arts practised by savages, 277 ; 
on the power of counting in 
primeval man, 279 ; on the pre- 
hensile organs of the male 
Labidocera Darwinii, 410 ; on 
Chlo'eon^ 422 ; on Smyrithurus 
luteus, 430 ; finding of new 
mates by jays, 621 ; on strife 
for women among the North 
American Indians, 855 ; on 
music, 868 ; on the ornamental 
practices of savages, 874 ; on the 
estimation of the beard among 
the Anglo-Saxons, 885 ; on arti- 
ficial deformation of the skull, 
888 ; on “ communal marriages,” 
896 ; on exogamy, 898, 899, 903 ; 
on the Veddahs, 902 ; on poly- 
andry, 904 

Lucanidae, variability of the man- 
dibles in the male, 460 
Lucanus, large size of males of, 
428 

cervus, numerical proportion 

of sexes of, 390 ; weapons of the 
male, 459 

claphus, use of mandibles of, 

460 ; large jaws of male, 423 
Lucas, Prosper, on pigeons, 637 ; 
on sexual preference in horses 
and bulls, 801 
Luminosity in insects, 426 
Lunar periods, 10, 254 
Lund, Dr., on skulls found in 
Brazilian caves, 261 
Lungs, enlargement of, in the Qui- 


chua and Aymara Indians, 50 ; 
a modified swim-bladder, 248 ; 
difierent capacity of, in races of 
man, 259 

Luschka, Prof., on the termination 
of the coccyx, 33 

Luxury, expectation of life un- 
influenced by, 209 
Lyccena, sexual dilferences of colour 
in species of, 475 
Lyc?en?p, colours of, 478 
Lycll, Sir C., on the antiquity of 
man, 3 ; on the origin of man, 4 ; 
on the parallelism of the develop- 
ment of species and languages, 
138 ; on the extinction of 
languages, 138; on the Inquisi- 
tion, 218 ; on the fossil remains 
of vertebrata, 242 ; on the fer- 
tility of mulattoes, 264 
Lynx, Canadian throat-ruff of the, 
V95 

Lyre-bird, assemblies of, 619 
M 

j\[acacus, ears of, 22 ; convoluted 
body in the extremity of the tail 
of, 33 ; variability of the tail in 
species of, 87 ; whiskers of species 
of, 811 

hrunneus, 88 

cynomolgus, superciliary ridge 

of, 849 ; beard and whiskers of, 
becoming white with age, 850 

ecaudatus, 90 

lasiotus, facial spots of, 840 

nemestrinus, 949 

radiatus, 232 

rhesus, sexual difference in the 

colour of, 823, 840, 949 
Macalister, Prof., on variations of 
the palmaris accessorius muscle, 
39 ; on muscular abnormalities in 
man, 62, 63 ; on the greater 
variability of the muscles in men 
than in women, 345 
Macaws, Mr Buxton’s observations 
.on, 156, 573 

McCann, J., on mental individu- 
ality, 128 

McClelland, J., on the Indian 
Cyprinidse, 526 


MACCULLOCH, 


INDEX. 


MALE. 


997 


Macculloch, Col., on an Indian 
village without any female 
children, 902 

, Dr., on tertian ague in a dog 

10 

Macgillivray, W., on the vocal 
organs of birds, 137 ; on the 
Egyptian goose, 558 ; on the 
habits of woodpeckers, 575 ; on 
the habits of the snipe, 577 ; on 
the whitethroat, 581 ; on the 
moulting of the snipes, 596 ; on 
the moulting of the Anatidse, 
599 ; on the tinding of new mates 
by magpies 621 ; on the pairing 
of a blackbird and thrush, 631 ; 
on pied ravens, 647 ; on the 
guillemots, 647 ; on the colours 
of the tits, 192 ; on the immature 
plumage of birds, 710, et seq. 

Machetes, sexes and young of, 740, 
et seq. 

-pugnax, supposed to be poly- 
gamous, 339 ; numerical propor- 
tion of the sexes in, 382 ; pug- 
nacity of the male, 552 ; double 
moult in, 595 

McIntosh, Dr., colours of the Ne- 
mertians, 407 

McKennan, marriage customs of 
Koraks, 914 

Mackintosh, on the moral sense, 
148 

Ma-- Lachlan, R. ,on Apatania mulie- 
bris and Boreus hy emails, 391 ; 
on the anal appendages of male 
insects, 423 ; on the pairing of 
dragon-flies, 429 ; on dragon- 
flies, 445, 446 ; on dimorphism 
in Agrion, 446 ; on the want of 
})Ugnacity in male dragon-flies, 
447 ; colour of ghost-moth in the 
Shetland Islands, 485 

M‘Leiinan, Mr., on infanticide, 
69, 902 ; on the origin of the 
belief in spiritual agencies, 143 ; 
on the prevalence of licentious- 
ness among savages, 182, 896 ; 
on the primitive barbarism 
of civilised nations, 221 ; on 
traces of tlie custom of the 
forcible capture of wives, 222, 
904 ; on polyandry, 904 


Macnamara, Mr., susceptibility of 
Andaman islanders and Nepalese 
to change, 291 

M ‘Neill, Mr., on the use of the 
antlers of deer, 779 ; on the 
Scotch deerhound, 789 ; on the 
long hairs on the throat of the 
stag, 796 ; on the bellowing of 
stags, 803 

Macropus, courtship of, 522 
Macrorhinus proboscideus, structure 
of the nose of, 806 
Magpie, power of speech of, 137 ; 
vocal organs of the, 567 ; nup- 
tial assemblies of, 619 ; new 
mates found by, 620 ; stealing 
bright objects, 630 ; young of 
tlie, 735; coloration of the, 753 
Maillard, M., on the proportion of 
the sexes in a species of Papilla 
from Bourbon, 386 
Maine, Sir Henry, on the absorp- 
tion of one tribe by another, 
197 ; a desire for improvement 
not general, 204 

Major, Dr. C. Forsyth, on fossil 
Italian apes, 240 ; skull of Bos 
etruscus, 772 ; tusks of miocene 
pigs, 794 

Makalolo, perforation of the upper 
lip by the, 877 

Malar bone, abnormal division of, 
in man, 58 

Malay, Archipelago, marriage-cus- 
toms of the savages of the, 913 
Malays, line of separation between 
the Papuans and the, 262 ; 
general beardlessness of the, 
852 ; staining of the teeth among, 
875 ; aversion of some, to hairs 
on the face, 885 

and Papuans, contrasted cha- 
racters of, 260 

Jtlale animals, struggles of, for the 
possession of the females, 326, 
328 ; eagerness of, in courtship, 
341, 342 ; generally more modi- 
fied than female, 340, 345 ; 

differ in the same way from fe- 
males and young, 359 
characters, developed in fe- 
males, 351 ; transfer of, to fe- 
male birds, 719 


998 


MALE. 


INDEX. 


MARSUPIALS. 


Male, sedentary, ol a hymenopterous 
parasite, 342 
Malefactors, 210 

Males, presence of rudimentary fe- 
male organs in, 250 
and females, comparative num- 
bers of, 329, 332 ; comparative 
mortality of, while young, 332 
Malherbe, on the woodpeckers, 
698 

Mallotus Peronii,. 60S 
villosus, 508 

Malthus, T. , on the rate of increase 
of population, 66, 67, 69 
Maluridfje, nidification of the, 692. 
Malurus, young of, 741 
Mammae, 320 ; rudimentary, in 
male mammals, 15, 34, 249, 250, 
251 ; supernumerary, in women, 
54 ; of male human subject, 557 
Mammalia, Prof. Owen’s classifica- 
tion of, 228 ; genealogy of the, 244 
Mammals, recent and tertiary, com- 
parison of cranial capacity of, 
82 ; nipples of, 250 ; pursuit of 
female, by the males, 341 ; 
secondary sexual characters of, 
763 ; weapons of, 764 ; relative 
size of the sexes of, 787 ; paral- 
lelism of, with birds in secondary 
sexual characters, 826 ; voices 
of, used especially during the 
breeding season, 863 
Man, variability of, 38 ; errone- 
ously regarded as more domesti- 
cated than other animals, 41 ; 
migrations of, 71 ; wide distri- 
bution of, 72 ; causes of the 
nakedness of, 85 ; supposed 
physical inferiority of, 97 ; a 
member of the Catarrhine group, 
239 ; early progenitors of, 248 ; 
transition from ape indefinite, 
279 ; numerical proportions of 
the sexes in, 331 ; difference be- 
tween the sexes, 344 ; proportion 
of sexes amongst the illegitimate, 
377 ; different complexion of 
male and female negroes, 847 ; 
secondary sexual characters of, 
846 ; primeval condition of, 906 
Man dans, correlation of colour and 
texture of hair in the, 306 


Mandible, left, enlarged in the 
male of Taphroderes distortus^ 
425 

Mandibles, use of the, in Ammo- 
phila, 423 ; large, of Coipdalis 
cornutus, 423 ; large, of male 
Lucanus elaphus, 423 

Mandrill, number of caudal vertebrae 
in the, 87 ; colours of the male, 
822, 825, 840 

Mantegazza, Prof,, on last molar 
teeth of man, 29 ; bright colours 
in male animals, 346 ; on the 
ornaments of savages, 873, et 
seq. ; on the beardlessness of the 
New Zealanders, 885 ; on the 
exaggeration of natural characters 
by man, 887 

Mantell, W. , on the engrossment of 
pretty girls by the New Zealand 
chiefs, 908 

Mantis^ pugnacity of species of, 443 

Maories, mortality of, 286 ; infan- 
ticide and proportion of sexes, 
394 ; distaste for hairiness 
amongst men, 885 

Marcus Aurelius, on the origin of 
the moral sense, 149 ; on the in- 
fluence of habitual thoughts, 188 

Mareca penelope^ 632 

Marks, retained throughout groups 
of birds, 651 

Marriage, restraints upon, among 
savages, 66 ; influence of, upon 
morals, 182 ; influence of, on 
mortalitv, 214 ; development of, 
899 

Marriages, early, 212 et seq. ; com- 
munal, 895, 898 

Marshall, Dr. W., protuberances on 
birds’ heads, 363, 585 ; on the 
moulting of birds, 598 ; advan- 
tage to older birds of paradise, 
740 

, Col., interbreeding amongst 

Todas, 293 ; infanticide and pro- 
portion of sexes with Todas, 393 ; 
choice of husband amongst Todas, 
905 

, Ml'., on the brain of a Busli- 

woman, 259 

Marsupials, 243 ; development of 
the nictitating membrane in, 


MARSUPIUM. 


INDEX. 


MEYER. 


999 


24 ; uterus of, 56 ; possession 
of nipj>les by, 251 ; their origin 
from Monotremata, 255 ; abdo- 
minal sacs of, 320 ; relative size 
of the sexes of, 787 ; colours of, 
814 

Marsupium, rudimentary in male 
marsupials, 249 

Martin, W. C. L., on alarm mani- 
fested by an orang at the sight of 
a turtle, 110 ; on the hair in 
Hylohates^ 234 ; on a female 
American deer, 785 ; on the 
voice of Hylohates agilis, 805 ; 
on Semnopitheaus nemceuSy 843 
on the beards of the inhabi- 
tants of St. Kilda, 852 
Martins deserting their young, 
165 

, C., on death caused by inllam- 

matiou of the vermiform append- 
age, 30 

Mastoid processes in man and apes, 
79 

Maudsley, Dr., on the influence of 
the sense of smell in man, 26 ; 
on idiots smelling their food, 
54 ; on Laura Bridgman, 134 ; 
on the development of the vocal 
organs, 136 ; moral sense failing 
in incipient madness, 190 ; 
change of mental faculties at 
puberty in man, 860 
Mayers, W. F., on the domestication 
of the goldfish in China, 525 
Mayhew, E., on the affection be- 
tween individuals of different 
sexes in the dog, 798 
Maynard, C. J., on the sexes of Chry- 
semys picta^ 537 

Meckel, on correlated variation of 
the muscles of the arm and leg, 
65 

Medicines, effect produced by, the 
same in man and in monkeys, 9 
Medusoe, bright colours of some, 
401 

Megalithic structures, prevalence 
of, 277 

Megapicus validas^ sexual difference 
of colour in, 698 

Megasotna, large size of males of, 
428 


Meigs, Dr. A., on variation in the 
skulls of the natives of America, 
39 

Meinecke, on the numerical propor- 
tion of the sexes in butterflies, 
386 

Melanesians, decrease of, 288 
Meldola, Mr. , colours and marriage 
flight of Colias and Pieris, 489 
Meliphagidse, Australian, nidifica- 
tion of, 692 

Melila, secondary sexual characters 
of, 412 

Meloe, difference of colour in the 
sexes of a species of, 452 
Memnon, young, 261 
Memory, manifestations of, in ani- 
mals, 112 

Mental characters, difference of, in 
different races of men, 260 

faculties, diversity of, in the 

same race of men, 40 ; inherit- 
ance of, 41 ; variation of, in 
the same species, 40, 100 ; simil- 
arity of the, in different races of 
man, 276; of birds, 625 

powers, difference of, in the 

two sexes in man, 857 
Menura Alberti, 619 ; song of, 
567 

superha, 619 ; long tails of 

both sexes of, 689 
Merganser, trachea of the male, 
572 

serrator, male plumage of, 

599 

Mergus cucullatus, speculum of, 
365 

— — merganser, young of, 713 
Metallura, splendid tail-feathers of, 
675 

Methoca ichneumonides, large male 
of, 429 

Meves, M., on the drumming of the 
snipe, 576 

Mexicans, civilisation of the, not 
foreign, 223 

Meyer, on a convoluted body at the 
extremity of the tail in a Macacus 
and a cat, 33 

, Dr. A., on the copulation of 

Phryganidse of distinct species, 
423 


1000 


MF.YER. 


INDEX. 


MMNOGENISTS. 


Meyer, Prof. L., on development of 
helix of ear, et seq. ; men’s 
ears more variable than women’s, 
345 ; antennae serving as ears, 431 
Migrations of man, etfects of, 71 
Migratory instinct of birds, 1 60 ; 
van'piishing the maternal, 165, 
173 

Mill, J. S., on the origin of the 
moral sense, 149; on the 
“greatest happiness principle,” 
183 ; on the difference of the 
mental powers in the sexes of 
man, 859 
Millipedes, 421 

Milne-Edwards, H., on the use of 
enlarged chelae of the male Gelasi- 
mits, 412 

Milvago leucurus, sexes and young 
of, 731 
Mimicry, 495 
M imus polyglottus, 627 
Mdnd, difference of, in man and the 
highest animals, 193 ; similarity 
of the, in different races, 276 
Minnow, proportion of the sexes in 
the, 385 

Mirror, behaviour of monkeys be- 
fore, 949 

Mirrors, larks attracted by, 630 
Mitchell, Dr., interbreeding in tlic 
Hebrides, 293 

Mitford, selection of children in 
Sparta, 43 

ilivart, St. George, on the reduction 
of organs, 17 ; on the ears of the 
lemuroidea, 22 ; on variability 
of the muscles in lemuroidea, 
61, 71 ; on the caudal vertebrae 
of monkeys, 87 ; on the classifi- 
cation of the primates, 237 ; 
on the orang and on man, 237 ; 
on differences in the lemuroidea, 
239 ; on the crest of the male 
newt, 533 

Idobius, Prof., on reasoning powers 
in a pike, 115 

Mocking-thrush, partial migration 
of, 627 ; young of the, 742 
Modifications, unserviceable, 93 
Ikloggridge, J. T., on habits of 
s])iders, 104 ; on habits of ants, 
227 


Moles, numerical proportion of the 
sexes in, 381 ; battles of male, 
763 

Mollienesia petenensis, sexual differ- 
ence in, 517 

Mollusca, beautiful colours and 
shapes of, 405 ; absence of sec- 
ondary sexual characters in the, 
403 

iHolluscoida, 246, 403 
Monacanthus scopas and M. Peronii, 
508 

Monboddo, Lord, on music, 872 
Mongolians, perfection of the senses 
in, 50 

Monkey, protecting his keeper from 
a baboon, 158, 169 ; bonnet-, 
232 ; rhesus-, sexual difference in 
colour of the, 823, 840 ; mous- 
tache-, colours of tiie, 820 
Monkeys, liability of, to the same 
diseases as man, 9 ; male, recog- 
nition of women by, 11 ; di- 
versity of the mental faculties in, 
40 ; breaking hard fruits with 
stones, 75 ; hands of the, 75, 76; 
basal caudal vcrtebrfE of, im- 
bedded ill the body, 88 ; revenge 
taken by, 105 ; maternal affec- 
tion in, 106 ; variability of the 
faculty of attention in, 112 ; 
American, manifestation of reason 
in, 118; using stones and sticks, 
123 ; imitative faculties of, 133 ; 
signal-cries of, 133 ; mutual 
kindnesses of, 154 ; sentinels 
posted by, 153 ; human char- 
acters of, 232 ; American, di- 
rection of the hair on the arms 
of some, 233 ; gradation of 
species of, 271 ; beards of, 
811 ; ornamental characters of, 
837 ; analogy of sexual differ- 
ences of, with those of man, 
849 ; ditferent degrees of dilfer- 
ence in the sexes of, 854 ; ex- 
pression of emotions by, 871 ; 
generally monogamous habits of, 
900 ; polygamous habits of some, 
900 ; naked surfaces of, 916 ; 
courtship of, 948 
Monogamy, not primitive, 222 
Monogenists, 272 


MOXONYCHUS. 


INDEX. 


MULLER. 


1001 


Monomjchus pseudacori, stridulation 
of, 467 

Monotreraata, 243 ; development 
of the nictitating membrane in, 
24 ; lactiferous glands of, 250 ; 
connecting mammals with rep- 
tiles, 255 

Monstrosities, analogous, in man 
and lower animals, 44 ; caused 
by arrest of development, 53 ; 
coiTelation of, 65 ; transmission 
of, 267 

Montagu, G., on the habits of the 
black and red grouse, 338 ; on the 
pugnacity of the ruff, 552, 554 ; 
on the singing of birds, 563 ; 
on the double moult of the male 
pintail, 599 

Monteiro, Mr., on Bucorax abyssi- 
nicus, 584 

Montes de Oca, M. , on the pugnacity 
of male Humming-birds, 551 
Monticola cyanca^ 695 
Monuments, as traces of extinct 
tribes, 281 

iloose, battles of, 764 ; horns of the, 
an incumbrance, 786 
Moral and instinctive impulses, alli- 
ance of, 170 

faculties, their influence on 

natural selection in man, 195 

rules, distinction between the 

higher and lower, 187 

sense, so-called, derived from 

the social instincts, 184 ; origin 
of the, 190 

tendencies, inheritance of, 

190 

Morality, supposed to be founded 
in selfishness, 183 ; test of, the 
general welfare of the community, 
185 ; gradual rise of, 191 ; in- 
fluence of a high standard of, 
203 

Morgan, L. H., on the beaver, 101 ; 
on the reasoning powers of the 
beaver, 114 ; on the forcible 
capture of udves, 222 ; on the 
castoreum of the beaver, 807 ; 
marriage unknown in primeval 
times, 896 ; on polyandry, 904 
Morley, J., on the appreciation of 
praise and fear of blame, 220 


Morris, F. 0., on hawks feeding an 
• orphan nestling, 624 
Morse, Dr., colours of mollusca, 
406 

Morselli, E., division of the malar 
bone, 58 

Mortality, comparative, of female 
and male, 333, 376 
Morton on the number of species of 
man, 270 

Moschkau, Dr. A., on a speaking 
starling, 130 

Moschus moschiferus, odoriferous 
organs of, 808 

Motacillae, Indian, young of, 715 
Moth, odoriferous, 472 
Moths, 479 ; absence of mouth in 
some males, 321 ; apterous 
female, 321 ; male, prehensile 
use of the tarsi by, 323 ; male, 
attracted by females, 388 ; sound 
produced by, 471 ; coloration of, 
482 ; sexual difl'erences of colour 
in, 484 

Motraot, inheritance of mutilation 
of tail feathers, 90, 921 ; racket- 
shaped feathers in the tail of 
a, 587 

Moult, double, 705 ; double annual, 
in birds, 594 
^loulting of birds, 738 
Moults, partial, 696 
Mouse, song of, 865 
Aloustache-monkey, colours of the, 
820, 841 

Moustaches, in monkeys, 232 
Mud-turtle, long claws of the male, 
537 

Mulattoes, persistent fertility of, 
264 ; immunity of, from yellow 
fever, 300 

Mule, sterility and strong vitality 
of the, 265 
!Mules, rational, 119 
MiilLer, Ferd., on the Mexicans and 
Peruvians, 223 

, Fritz, on astomatous males of 

Tanais, 321 ; on the disappear- 
ance of spots and stripes in adult 
mammals, 835 ; on the propor- 
tions of the sexes in some Cnis- 
lacea, 392 ; on secondary sexual 
characters in various Crustaceans, 


1002 


MULLFR. 


INDEX. 


MUTILLA. 


408 et seq. ; musical contest be- 
tween male Cicadce, 434 ; mode pf 
holding wings in Castina, 482 ; 
oil birds shewing a preference for 
certain colours, 486 ; on the 
sexual maturity of young amphi- 
pod Crustacea, 739 
Muller, Hermann, emergence of bees, 
from pupa, 330 ; pollen-gather- 
ing of bees, 352 ; proportion of 
sexes in bees, 391 ; courting of 
Eristalis, 431 ; colour and sexual 
selection with bees, 449 
, J., on the nictitating mem- 
brane and semilunar fold, 24 
, Max, on the origin of lan- 
guage, 132 ; language implies 
power of general conception, 135 ; 
struggle for life among the words, 
&c., of languages, 138 

, S., on the banteng, 819 ; on 

the colours of Semnopithecus 
chrysomelas, 820 

Muntjac-deer, weapons of the, 784 
Murie, J., on the reduction of organs, 
17 ; on the ears of the Lemu- 
roidea, 22 ; on variability of 
the muscles in the Lemuroidea, 
61, 71 ; basal caudal vertebrae of 
Macacus hrunneus imbedded in 
the body, 88 ; on the manner of 
sitting in short-tailed apes, 89 ; 
on differences in the Lemuroidea, 
239 ; on the throat-pouch of 
the male bustard, 570 ; on the 
mane of Otaria juhata, 795 ; on 
the sub-orbital pits of Ruminants, 
808 ; on the colours of the sexes 
in Otaria nigrescens, 816 
Murray, A., on the Pediculi of 
different races of men, 263 

, T. A., on the fertility of 

Australian women with white 
men, 264 
Mus coninga, 123 

minutus, sexual diflerence in 

the colour of, 815 
Musca vomitoria, 81 
Muscicapa grisola, 693 

Ivjduosa^ 693 

rutidlla, breeding in imma- 
ture plumage, 739 
Muscle, ischio-pubic, 61 


Muscles, rudimentary, occurrence 
of, in man, 17 ; variability of 
the, 39 ; effects of use and dis- 
use upon, 47 ; animal-like 
abnormalities of, in man, 61 ; 
correlated variation of, in the arm 
and leg, 65 ; variability of, in 
the hands and feet, 71 ; of the 
jaws, influence of, on the phy- 
siognamy of the Apes, 80 ; 
habitual spasms of, causing medi- 
cations of the facial bones, 83, of 
the early progenitors of man, 248 ; 
greater variability of the, in men 
than in women, 344 

Musculus sternalis. Prof. Turner on 
the, 18 

Music, 276 ; of birds, 562 ; dis- 
cordant, love of savages for, 580 ; 
reason of power of perception of 
notes in animals, 865 ; power 
of distinguishing notes, 866 ; 
its connection with primeval 
speech, 871 ; different appre- 
ciation of, by different peoples, 
868 ; origin of, 867, 872 ; effects 
of, 870 

Musical cadences, perception of, by 
animals, 866 ; powers of man, 
861 et seq. 

Musk-deer, canine teeth of male, 
766, 784 ; male, odoriferous organs 
of the, 808 ; winter change of 
the, 828 

Musk-duck, Australian, 549 ; large 
size of male, 554 ; of Guiana, 
pugnacity of the male, 554 

Musk-ox, horns of, 771 

Musk-rat, protective resemblance 
of the. to a clod of earth, 827 

Musophagoe. colours and nidifica- 
tion of the, 694 ; both sexes of, 
equally brilliant, 701 

Mussels opened by monkeys, 75 

Mustela, winter change of two 
species of, 828 

Musters, Capt. , on Rhea Darwinii, 
731 ; marriages amongst Pata- 
gonians, 912 

Mutilations, liealing of, 10 ; in- 
heritance of, 90 

Mutilla europcea, stridulation of, 
450 


MUTILLID^. 


INDEX. 


NIDIFICATION. 


1003 


Mutillidse, absence of ocelli in 
female, 422 

Mycetes caraya^ polygamous, 335 ; 
vocal organs of, 805 ; beard of, 
811 ; sexual differences of colour 
in, 819 ; voice of, 864 

seniculus, sexual differences of 

colour in, 820 
Myriapoda, 421 

N 

Nageli, on the influence of natural 
selection on plants, 91 ; on the 
gradation of species of plants, 271 
Nails, coloured yellow or purple in 
part of Africa, 874 
Narwhal, tusks of the, 766, 774 
Nasal cavities, large size of, in 
American aborigines, 50 
Nascent organs, 16 
Nathusius, H. von, on the improved 
breeds of pigs, 274 ; male domes- 
ticated animals more variable 
than females, 344 ; horns of cas- 
trated sheep, 773 ; on the breed- 
ing of domestic animals, 909 
Natural selection, its effects on the 
early progenitors of man, 71 ; 
influence of, on man, 90, 94 ; 
limitation of the principle, 92 ; 
influence of, on social animals, 
94 ; Mr Wallace on the limitation 
of, by the influence of the mental 
faculties in man, 195 ; influence 
of, in the progress of the United 
States, 218 ; in relation to sex, 
399 

Natural and sexual selection con- 
trasted, 349 

Nauiette, jaw from, large size of 
the canines in, 60 
Neanderthal skull, capacity of the, 
82 

Neck, proportion of, in soldiers and 
sailors, 48 

Xecrophorus, stridulation, of, 462 
466 

Xectarinia, young of, 714 
JVectarinice, moulting of the, 597 ; 

nidification of, 692 
Negro, resemblance of a, to Euro- 
peans in mental characters, 276 


Negro-women, their kindness to 
Mungo Park, 181 

Negroes, Caucasian features in, 
259 ; character of, 260 ; lice of, 
263 ; fertility of, when crossed 
with other races, 265 ; blackness 
of, 264, 268 ; variability of, 269, 
270 ; immunity of, from yellow 
fever, 300 ; difference of, from 
Americans, 305 ; disfigurements 
of the, 825 ; colour of new-born 
children of, 848 ; comparative 
beardlessness of, 852 ; readily 
become musicians, 868 ; apprecia- 
tion of beauty of their women, 
by, 879, 880, 882; idea of beauty 
among, 886 ; compression of the 
nose %■ some,. 888 
Neme|±ians, colours of, 407 
Neolithic period, 223 
Neomorpha, sexual difference of the 
beak in, 551 

Nephila, size of male, 420 
Nests, made by fishes, 528 ; de- 
coration of, by Humming-birds, 
630 

Neumeister, on a change of colour 
in pigeons after several moult- 
ings, 367 

Neuration, difference of, in the two 
sexes of some butterflies and hy- 
menoptera, 426 
Neuroptera, 391, 444 
Neurothemis, dimorphism in, 446 
New Zealand, expectation by the 
natives of, of their extinction, 
297 ; practice of tattooing in, 
878; aversion of natives. of, to 
hairs on the face, 885 ; pretty 
girls engrossed by the chiefs in, 
908 

Newton, A., on the throat-pouch of 
the male bustard, 670 ; on the 
differences between the females of 
two species of Oxynotus, 717 ; 
on the habits of the Phalarope, 
dotterel, and godwit, 729 
Newts, 532 

Nicholson, Dr., on the non-immu- 
nity of dark Europeans from 
yellow fever, 302 
Nictitating membrane, 24, 248 
Nidification! of fishes, 528 ; rela- 


1004 


NIGHT-HERON. 


INDEX, 


OPOSSUM 


tion of, to colour, 690, 695 ; of 
British birds, 692 
Night-heron, cries of the, 563 
Nightingale, arrival of the male 
b^efore the female, 327 ; object of 
the song of the, 564 
Nightingales, new mates found by, 
622 

Nightjar, selection of a mate by 
the female, 634 ; Australian, 
sexes of, 731 ; coloration of the, 
748 

Nightjars, noise made by some male, 
with their wings, 574 ; elongated 
, feathers in, 586, 613 
Nilghau, sexual differences of colour 
in the, 816 

Nilsson, Prof., on .the resemblance 
of stone arrow-heads from ^arious 
places, 277 ; on the development 
of the horns of the reindeer, 361 
Nipples, absence of, in Monotre- 
mata, 250 

Nitsche, Dr., ear of foetal orang, 
23 

Nitzsch, C. L., on the down of 
birds, 594 

Nocture, brightly-coloured beneath, 
483 

Noctuidre, coloration of, 480 
Nomadic habits, unfavourable to 
human progress, 204 
Nordmann, A., on Tetrao urogallo- 
idcs, 617 

Norfolk Island, half-breeds on, 295 
Norway, numerical proportion of 
male and female births in, 375 
Nose, .resemblance of, in man and 
the apes, 236 ; piercing and 
ornamentation of the, 876 ; 
very flat, not admired in negroes, 

887 ; flattening of the, 888 
Nott and Gliddon, on the features 

of Rameses II., 261 ; on the 
features of Amunoph III., 261 ; 
on skulls from Brazilian caves, 
261 ; on the immunity of negroes 
and mulattoes from yellow fever, 
300 ; on the deformation of the 
skull among American tribes, 

888 

Novara, voyage of the, suicide in 
New Zealand, 179 


Nudibranch Mollusca, brightcolours 
of, 403 

Numerals, Roman, 222 
Nunemaya, natives of, bearded, 853 
Nuthatch, of Japan, intelligence of, 
625; Indian, 743 

0 

Obedience, value of, 200 
Observation, powers of, possessed 
by birds, 627 

Occupations, sometimes a cause of 
diminished stature, 45 ; effect 
of, upon the proportions of the 
body, 45 

Ocelli, absence of, in female Mutil- 
lidse, 422 

of birds, formation and vari- 
ability of the, 652 
Ocelot, sexual diflerences in tlie 
colouring of the, 815 
Ocyhaps lophotes, 612 
Odonata, 391 

Odonestis potatoria, sexual differ- 
ence of colour in, 484 
Odour, correlation of, with colour 
of skin, 306 ; of moths, 472 ; 
emitted by snakes in the breed- 
ing season, 539 ; of mammals, 
807 

(Ecanihus nivalis, difference of 
colour in the sexes of, 444 

pellucidus, 444 

Ogle, Dr. W., relation between col- 
our and power of smell, 25 
Oidemia, 749 

Oliver, on sounds produced by 
Pimdia striata, 469 
Omalnplia hrunrua, stridulation of, 
465 

Oriitis furcifer, processes of anterior 
femora of the male, and on the 
head and thorax of the female, 
456, 457 

Onthophagus, 455 

rangifer, sexual differences of, 

454 ; variations in the horns of 
the male, 455 

Oj)hidia, sexual differences of, 538 
Ophidium, 532 

Opossum, wide range of, in America, 
262 


OPTIC. 


INDEX. 


OWEN, 


1005 


Optic nerve, atrophy of the, caused 
by destruction of the eye, 47 
Orang-Outan, 854 ; Bischoff on the f 
agreement of the brain of the, 
with that of man, 8 ; adult age 
of the, 11 ; ears of the, 20 ; 
vermiform appendage of, 30 ; 
hands of the, 75 ; absence of 
mastoid processes in the, 79 ; 
platforms built by the, 100 ; 
alarmed at the sight of a turtle, 
110; using a stick as a lever, 
124; using missiles, 125; using 
the leaves of the Paiulanus as a 
night covering, 126 ; direction 
of the hair on the arms of the, 
233 ; its aberrant characters, 
237 ; supposed evolution of the, 
274 ; voice of the, 804 ; mono- 
gamous habits of the, 900 ; male, 
beard of the, 811 

Oranges, treatment of, by monkeys, 

75 

Orange-tip butterfly, 473, 478, 

479 

OrchesHa Darwinii, dimorphism of 
males of, 412 

TiLcuratinga^ limbs of, 411, 

417 

Ordeal, trial by, 146 
Oreas canna, colours of, 817 

Derbianus, colours of, 817, 829 

Organs, prehensile, 323 ; utilised 
for new purposes, 869 
Organic scale, von Baer’s definition 
of progress in, 253 
Orioles, nidification of, 691 
Oriolus, species of, breeding in im- 
mature plumage, 739 

melanocephalus, coloration of 

the sexes in, 702 

Ornaments, prevalence of similar, 
277 ; of male birds, 561 ; fond- 
ness of savages for, 873 
Ornamental characters, equal trans- 
mission of, to both sexes, in 
mammals, 827 ; of monkeys, 
837 

OniUhoptera crcesus, 386 
Ornithurynchus, 241 ; reptilian 
tendency of, 245 ; spur of the 
male, 767 

Orocetes enjihrogtiatra^ young of, 743 


Orrony, Grotto of. 31 
Orsodacna atru, difference of colour 
in the sexes of, 452 

ruficollis, 452 

Orthoptera, 434 ; metamorphosis 
of, 365 ; stridulating apparatus 
of, 435, 442 ; colours of, 443 ; 
rudimentary stridulating organs 
in female, 442 ; stridulation of 
the, and Homoptera, discussed, 
443 

Oriygornis gularis, pugnacity of the 
male, 556 

Oryctes, stridulation of, 465 ; sexual 
differences in ihe stridulant 
organs of, 467 

Oryx leucuryx, use of the horns of, 
777, 783, 790 

Osphranter rufus, sexual difference 
in the colour of, 814 
Ostrich, African, sexes and incuba- 
tion of the, 729 

Ostriches, stripes of young, 708 
Otaria jubata, mane of the male, 
795 

nigrescens, difference in the 

coloration of the sexes of, 816 
Otis be/igaleTisis, love-antics of the 
male, 581 

tai'da, throat-pouch of the 

male, 570 ; polygamous, 339 
Ouzel, ring-, colours and nidifica- 
tion of the, 694 

, rvater-, singing in tfie au- 
tumn, 566 ; colours and nidifica- 
tion of the, 694 

Ovibos raoschaius, horns of, 771 
Ovipositor of insects, 320 
Ovis cycloceros, mode of fighting of, 
775, 783 

Ovule of man, 12 

Owen, Prof., on the Corpoi-a Wolf- 
fiana, 13 ; on the great toe in 
man, 13; on the nictitating 
membrane and semilunar fold, 
24 ; on the development of the 
posterior molars in different 
races of man, 28 ; on tlie length 
of tlie ccecurn in the Koala, 29 ; 
on the coccygeal vertebroe, 33 ; 
on rudimentary structures be- 
longing to the reproductive sys- 
tem, 34 ; on abnormal condi- 


1006 


OWLS. 


INDEX. 


PARADISE. 


tions of the human uterus, 57 ; 
on the number of digits in the 
Ichthyopterygia, 55 ; on the 
canine teeth in man, 59 ; on the 
walking of the chimpanzee and 
orang, 75 ; on the mastoid pro- 
cesses in the higher apes, 79 ; 
on the hairiness of elephants in 
elevated districts, 85 ; on the 
caudal vertebrae of monkeys, 
87 ; classification of mammalia, 
228 ; on the hair in monkeys, 
232 ; on the piscine affinities of 
the Ichthyosaurians, 245 ; on 
polygamy and monogamy among 
the antelopes, 335 ; on the horns 
of Antilocapra americana, 362 ; 
on the musky odour of crocodiles 
during the breeding season, 538 ; 
on the scent-glands of snakes, 
539 ; on the Dugong, Cachalot, and 
Ornithorhynchus, 766, 767 ; on 
the antlers of the red deer, 779 ; 
on the dentition of the Camelidae, 
784 ; on the horns of the Irish 
elk, 786 ; on the voice of the 
giraffe, porcupine, and stag, 
802 ; on the laryngeal sac of the 
gorilla and orang, 804 ; on the 
odoriferous glands of mammals, 
807, 808 ; on the effects of 
emasculation on the vocal organs 
of men, 861 ; on the voice of 
Hylohates agilis^ 864 ; on Ame- 
rican monogamous monkeys, 
900 

Owls, white, new mates found by, 
622 

Oxynotus, difference of the females 
of two species of, 717 

P. 

Pachydermata, 336 
Pachytylus migratorius, 435 
Paget, on the abnormal develop- 
ment of hairs in man, 26 ; on 
the thickness of the skin on the 
soles of the feet of infants, 49 
Pagurus, carrying the female, 412 
Painting, pleasure of savages in, 
276 

Palcemon, chelse of a species of, 411 


Palceornis, sexual differences of co- 
lour in, 753 

javaniciis, colour of beak of, 

703 

rosa, young of, 713 

PalaTnedea cornuta, spurs on the 
%^dngs, 558, 559 
Paleolithic period, 223 
Palestine, habits of the chaffinch in, 
383 

Pallas, on the perfection of the 
senses in the Mongolians, 50 ; 
on the want of connexion be- 
tween climate and the colour of 
the skin, 298 ; on the poly- 
gamous habits of Antilope Saiga, 
335 ; on the lighter colour of 
horses and cattle in winter in 
Siberia, 354 ; on the tusks of 
the musk-deer, 784, 785 ; on 
the odoriferous glands of mam- 
mals, 807 ; on the odoriferous 
glands of the musk-deer, 809 ; 
on winter changes of colour in 
mammals, 828 ; on the ideal of 
female beauty in North China, 
880 

Palrnaris accessorius, muscle varia- 
tions of the, 40 
Pampas, horses of the, 280 
Pangenesis, ’hypothesis of, 352, 
356 

Panniculus carnosus, 17 
Pansch, on the brain of a foetal 
Cebits apella, 317 

Papilio, proportion of the sexes in 
North American species of, 386 ; 
sexual differences of colouring in 
species of, 474 ; coloration of the 
wings in species of, 478 
Papilio ascanius, 474 
Sesostris a,ndi Childrence, varia- 
bility of, 490 

Turnus, 386 

Papilionidae, variability in the, 490 
Papuans, line of separation between 
the, and the Malays, 262 ; beards 
of the, 852 ; teeth of, 875 
and Malays, contrast in char- 
acters of, 260 

Paradise, Birds of, 618, 705 ; sup- 
posed by Lesson to be polygam- 
ous, 338 ; rattling of their quills 


PARADISEA. 


INDEX. 


PEEWIT. 


1007 


by, 573 ; racket-shaped feathers 
ill, 587 ; sexual differences in 
colour of, 589 ; decomposed 
featliers in, 587, 614 ; display of 
plumage by the male, 603 ; 
sexual differences in colour of, 
749 

raradisea apoda^ barbless feathers 
in the tail of, 587 ; plumage of, 
589 ; and P. papuuna, 587, 588 ; 
divergence of the females of, 717 ; 
increase of beauty with age, 740 

2 )apuana, plumage of, 71 7 

Paraguay, Indians of, eradication 
of eyebrows and eyelashes by, 
884 

Parallelism of development of spe- 
cies and languages, 138 
Parasites, on man and animals, 10 ; 
as evidence of specific identity 
or distinctness, 263 ; immunity 
from, correlated with colour, 299 
Parental feeling in earwigs, star- 
fishes, and spiders, 162 ; affec- 
tion, partly a result of natural 
selection, 161 

Parents, age of, influence upon sex 
of offspring, 378 

Parinaj, sexual difference of colour 
in, 698 

Park, Mungo, negro-women teach- 
ing their children to love the 
truth, 181 ; his treatment by 
the negro-women, 180, 857 ; on 
negro opinions of the appearance 
of white men, 882 
Parker, Mr., no bird or reptile in 
line of mammalian descent, 244 
Parrakeet, young of, 703, 735 ; 
Australian, variation in the colour 
of the thighs of a male, 646 
Parrot, racket-shaped feathers in 
the tail of a, 586 ; instance of 
benevolence in a, 627 
Parrots, change of colour in, 91 ; 
imitative faculties of, 110 ; living 
in triplets, 624 ; affection of, 
627 ; colours and nidification of 
the, 694, 697, 698 ; immature 
jfiuniage of the, 712 ; colours of, 
746 ; sexual differences of colour 
in, 753 ; musical powers of, 
869 


Parthenogenesis in the Tenthre- 
dinae, 390 ; in Cynipidae, 390 ; 
in Crustacea, 392 

Partridge, monogamous, 338 ; pro- 
portion of the sexes in the, 882 ; 
Indian, 556 ; female, 719 

“ dances,” 580, 617 

Partridges, living in triplets, 623 ; 
spring coveys of male, 624 ; 
distinguishing persons, 628 
Parus cc&ruleus, 698 
Passer, sexes and young of, 737 

hrachydactylus, 737 

domesticus, 693, 737 

montanus, 693, 737 

Patagonians, self-sacrifice by, 170 ; 
marriages of, 912 

Patterson, Mr., on the Agrionidae, 
446 

Patteson, Bishop, decrease of Me- 
lanesians, 288 
Paulistas of Brazil, 269 
Pavo cristatus, 364, 656 

muticus, 364, 656 ; possession 

of spurs by the female, 557, 685 

nigripennis, 639 

Payaguas Indians, thin legs and 
thick arms of the, 48 
Payan, Mr., on the proportion of 
the sexes in sheep, 381 
Peacock, polygamous, 338 ; sexual 
characters of, 364 ; pugnacity 
of the, 557 ; Javan, possessing 
spurs, 557 ; rattling of the quills 
by, 573 ; elongated tail-coverts of 
the, 585, 613 ; love of display of 
the, 600, 658 ; ocellated spots of 
the, 656 ; inconvenience of long 
tail of the, to the female, 676, 
687, 688 ; continued increase of 
beauty of the, 740 

-butterfly, 478 

Peafowl, preference of females for a 
particular male, 638 ; first ad- 
vances made by the female, 640 
Pediculi of domestic animals and 
man, 263 

Pedigree of man, 255 
Pedionomus torquatus, sexes of, 
726 

Peel, J., on horned sheep, 771 
Peewit, wing-tubercles of tlie male, 
558 


1008 


PELAGIC. 


INDEX. 


PHEASANT. 


Pelagic animals, transparency of, 
402 

Pdecanus erytlirorhynchus, horny 
crest on the beak of the male, 
during the breeding season, 504 

onocTotaluSf spring plumage of, 

509 

Pelcle, an African ornament, 877 
Pelican, blind, fed by his com- 
[)anions, 156 ; young, guided by 
old birds, 156 ; pugnacity of the 
male, 554 

Pelicans, fishing in concert, 154 
rdobius Hennanni, stridulation of, 
464, 466 

Pelvis, alteration of, to suit the 
erect attitude of man, 79 ; .dilier- 
ences of the, in the sexes of man, 
847 

Penelope nigra, sound produced by 
the male, 577 

Pennant, on the battles of seals, 
764; on the bladder-nose seal, 807 
Penthe, antennal cusliions of the 
male, 425 

Perch, brightness of male, during 
breeding season, 520 
Peregiine falcon, new mate found 
by, 621 

Period of variability, relation of, to 
sexual selection, 370 
Periodicity, vital. Dr Laycock on, 
10 

Periods, lunar, followed by func- 
tions in man and animals, 10, 
254 

of life, inheritance at coire- 

sponding, 353, 358 
Perisoreus canadensis, young of, 
735 

Peritrichia, difference of colour in 
the sexes of a species of, 452 
Periwinkle, 404 
Pernis cristata, 646 
Perrier, M., on sexual selection, 
323 ; on bees, 450 
Perseverance, a characteristic of 
man, 859 

Persians, said to be improved by 
intermixture Avith Georgians and 
Circassians, 894 

Personnat, M. , on Bomhyx Yamamai, 
387 


Peruvians, civilisation of the, not 
foreign, 223 
Petrels, colours of, 753 
Petrocincla cyanea, young of, 743 
Petrocossyphus, 704 
Petronia, 737 

Pfeiffer, Ida, on Javan ideas of 
beauty, 883 

Phacochoerus ccthiopicus, tusks and 
pads of, 793 

Phalanger, Vulpine, black varieties 
of the, 823 

Phalaropits falicarius 728 

hyperboreus, 728 

Phanceus, 457 

carnifex, variation of the 

horns of the male, 455 

sexual differences of, 454 

Lancifer, 453 

Phaseolarctus cinereus, taste for 
rum and tobacco, 9 
Phasgonura viridissima, stridulation 
of, 437, 438 

Phasianus Soernmerringii, 679 

versicolor, 603 

IFctllichii, 609, 720 

Pheasant, polygamous, 338 ; and 
black grouse, hybrids of, 631 ; 
production of hybrids Avith the 
common foAvl, 641 ; immature 
plumage of the, 712 

, Amherst, display of, 603 

, Argus, 585, 705; display of 

plumage by the male, 605 ; ocel- 
lated spots of the, 654, 661 ; 
gradation of characters in the, 
662. 663 

, Blood-, 557 

, Cheer, 609, 720 

, Eared, 364, 609, 720 ; length 

of the tail in the, 688 ; sexes 
alike in the, 702 

, Fire-backed, possessing spurs, 

557 

, Golden, display of plumage 

by the male, 603 ; age of mature 
plumage in the, 738 ; sex of 
young, ascertained by pulling out 
head-feathers, 738 

, Kalij, drumming of the male, 

574, 714 

, Reeve’s, length of the tail in, 

689 


PHEASANT. 


INDEX. 


PLANTS. 


1009 


Pheasant, Silver, triumphant male, 
deposed on account of spoiled plu- 
mage, 639 ; sexual coloration of 
the, 751 

, Soemmerring’s, 678, 689 

, Tragopan, 584 ; display of 

plumage by the male, 605 ; 
marking of the sexes of the, 
653 

Pheasants, period of acquisition of 
male characters in the family of 
the, 364 ; proportion of sexes in 
chicks of, 382 ; length of the 
tail in, 678, 687, 688 
Philters, worn by women, 880 
Phoca grosnlandica, sexual differ- 
ence in the coloration of, 816 
Phcenicura ruticilla, 622 
Phosphorescence of insects, 426 
Phryganidse, copulation of distinct 
species of, 423 
Phryniscus nigricans, 534 
Physical inferiority, supposed, of 
man, 96 

Pickering, on the number of species 
of man, 270 

Picton, J. A., on the soul of man, 
937 

Picas auratus, 554 

major, 612 

Pieris, 478, 489 

Pigeon, female, deserting a weak- 
ened mate, 330 ; carrier, late 
development of the wattle in, 
367 ; pouter, late development of 
the crop in, 367 ; domestic, 
breeds and sub-breeds of, 701 
Pigeons, nestling, fed by the secre- 
tion of the crop of both parents, 
252 ; changes of plumage in, 
354 ; transmission of sexual pecu- 
liarities in, 356 ; Belgian, with 
black-streaked males, 357, 367, 
679 ; changing colour after 
several moultings, 367 ; nume- 
rical proportion of the sexes in, 
382 ; cooing of, 572 ; varia- 
tions in plumage of, 589 ; dis- 
play of plumage by male, 612 ; 
local memory of, 626 ; anti- 
pathy of female, to ceitain males, 
637 ; pairing of, 638 ; profli- 
gate male and female, 638 ; 

3 


wing-bars and tail-feathers of, 
652 ; supposititious breed of, 
677 ; pouter and carrier, peculi- 
arities of, predominant in males, 
680 ; nidification of, 691 ; Aus- 
tralian, 699 ; immature plumage 
of the. 712 

Pigs, origin of the improved breeds 
of, 274 ; numerical proportion 
of the sexes in, 381 ; stripes of 
young, 708, 833 ; tusks of mi- 
ocene, 794 ; sexual preference 
shewn by, 801 

Pike, American, brilliant colours of 
the male, during the breeding 
season, 521 

, reasoning powers of, 115 ; 

male, devoured by females, 384 
Pike, L. 0., on the psychical ele- 
ments of religion, 146 
Pimelia striaia, sounds produced by 
the female, 469 
Pinel, hairiness in idiots, 54 
Pintail, drake, plumage of, 599 ; 
pairing with a wild duck,. 633 

Duck, pairing with a widgeon, 

632 

Pipe-fish, filamentous, 527 ; mar- 
supial receptacles of the male, 
530 

Pipits, moulting of the, 597 
Pipra, modified secondary wing- 
feathers of male, 578 

delidosa, 578, 579 

Pirates stridulus, stridulation of, 
432 

Pitcairn island, half-breeds on, 295 
Pithecia Uucocephala, sexual differ- 
ences of colour in, 820 

Satanas, beard of, 811, 812 ; 

resemblance of, to a negro, 922 
Pits, suborbital, of Ruminants, 808 
PittidjE, nidification of, 691 
Placentata, 243 
Plagiostomous fishes, 507 
Plain-wanderer, Australian, 726 
Planarice, bright colours of some, 
401 

Plantain-eaters, colours and nidifi- 
cation of the, 694 ; both sexes 
of, equally brilliant, 701 
Plants, cultivated, more fertile than 
wild, 67 ; Nageli, on natural 

T 


1010 


PLATA LBA. 




PREFERENCE. 


selection in, 91 ; male flowers 
of, mature before the female, 
327 : phenomena of fertilisation 
in, 343 

Platalea, 572 ; change of plumage 
in, 703 

PlatyhUmuSy 444 
Platycercus young of, 735 
Platyphyllum concavum, 435, 439 
Platyrrhine monkeys, 236 
Platysma myoides^ 17 
Plecostomm, head-tentacles of the 
males of a species of, 519 

harbatus, peculiar beard of the 

male, 518 

Plectropterus gainhensis, spurred 
wings of, 558 
Ploceus, 566, 574, 618 
Plovers, wing-spurs of, 558 ; double 
moult in, 594, 597 
Plumage, changes of, inheritance 
of, by fowls, 353 ; tendency to 
analogous variation in, 587 ; 
display of, by male birds, 600, 
611 ; changes of, in relation to 
season, 704 ; immature, of birds, 
708, 709 ; colour of, in relation 
to protection, 745 
Plumes on the head in birds, differ- 
ence of, in the sexes, 687 
Fneumora, structure of, 440 
Podica^ sexual diflerence in the 
colour of the irides, 649 
Poeppig, on the contact of civilized 
and savage races, 283 
Poison, avoidance of, by animals, 121 
Poisonous fruits and herbs avoided 
by animals 101 

Poisons, immunity from, correlated 
with colour, 300 

Polish fowls, origin of the crest in, 
356 

Pollen and van Dam, on the colours 
of Lemur macaco y 819 
Polyandry, 904 ; in certain Cy- 
prinidae, 385 ; among the Ela- 
teridae, 390 

Polydactylism in man, 55 
Polygamy, influence of, upon sexual 
selection, 334 ; superinduced by 
domestication, 339 ; supposed 
increase of female births by, 
378 ; in the stickleback, 509 


Polygenists, 272 

Polynesia, prevalence of infanticide 
in, 902 

Polynesians, wide geographical 
range of, 43 ; difference of sta- 
ture among the, 46 ; crosses of, 
269 ; variability of, 269 ; he- 
terogeneity of tlie, 298 ; aver- 
sion of, to hairs on the face, 885 
PolyplectroTiy number of spurs in, 
557 ; display of plumage by the 
male, 605 ; gradation of charac- 
ters in, 657 ; female of, 718 

chinquiSy 604, 658 

Hardwi^Uy 658 

malaxxense, 659, 660 

Polyplectron Napoleonis, 658, 660 
Polyzoa, 403 
Pomotis, 529 
Pontoporeia affiniSy 409 
Porcupine, mute, except in the 
rutting season, 802 
Pores, excretoiy, numerical rela- 
tion, of, to the hairs in sheep, 
306 

PorpitoCy bright colours of some, 
401 

Portax pictay dorsal crest and 
throat - tuft of, 810 ; sexual 
differences of colour in, 816, 
818, 829 

Portunus pubeVy pugnacity of, 414 
Potamochcerus penicUlatus, tusks 
and facial knobs of the, 794 
Pouchet, G., the relation of instinct 
to intelligence, 101 ; on the in- 
stincts of ants, 227 ; on the 
caves of Abou-Simbel, 261 ; on 
the immunity of negroes from 
yellow fever, 300 ; change of 
colour in fishes, 527 
Pouter pigeon, late development of 
the large crop in, 367 
Powell, Dr., on stridulation, 433 
Power, Dr., on the different colours 
of the sexes in a species of SquillUy 
416 

Powys, Mr., on the habits of tlie 
chaffinch in Corfu, 383 
Pre-eminence of man, 72 
Preference for males by female 
birds, 631, 641 ; shewn by mam- 
mals, in pairing, 796 


PHEUENSILE. 


INDEX. 


QUATREFAOES, 


ion 


Prehensile organs, 323 
Freshytis entellus^ fighting of the 
male, 855 

Preyer, Dr., on function of shell 
of ear, 20 ; on siipemuraeraiy 
mammae in women, 54 
Prichard, on the difference of 
stature among the Polynesians, 
46 ; on the connection between 
the breadth of the skull in the 
Mongolians and the perfection of 
their senses, 50 ; on the capacity 
of British skulls of different ages, 
82 ; on the ffattened heads of 
the Colombian savages, 875 ; on 
Siamese notions of beauty, 881 ; 
on the beardlessness of the Sia- 
mese, 885 ; on the deformation 
of the head among American 
tribes and the natives of Arakhan, 
888 

Primary sexual organs, 319 
Primates, 230, 317 ; sexual diff er- 
ences of colour in, 819 
Primogeniture, evils of, 208 
Prionidse, difference of the sexes in 
colour, 452 

Froctotretus multi niaculatus, 548 

temiif, sexual difference in the 

colour of, 547 
Profligacy, 211 

Progenitors, early, of man, 248 
Progi-ess, not the nonnal rule in 
human society, 204 ; elements of, 
217 

Prong-horn antelope, horns of, 362 
Proportions, difference of, in dis- 
tinct races, 259 

Protective colouring in butterflies, 
477 ; in lizards, 548 ; in birds, 
722, 745 ; in mammals, 827 

nature of the dull colouring 

of female Lepidoptera, 492, 493, 
497 

resemblances in fishes, 527 

Protozoa, absence of secondary 
sexual charactei-s in, 400 
Pruner-Bey, on the occurrence of 
the supra -condyloid foramen in 
tlie humenis of man, 32 ; on the 
colour of negro infants, 848 
Prussia, numerical proportion of 
male and female births in, 375 


Psocus^ proportions of the sexes in, 
391 

Ptarmigan, monogamous, 338 ; sum- 
mer and winter plumage of the, 
595, 597 ; nuptial assemblages of, 
619 ; triple moult of the, 705 ; 
protective coloration of, 723 

Puff-birds, colours and nidification 
of the, 694 

Pugnacity of fine-plumaged male 
birds, 609 

Pumas, stripes of young, 708 

Puppies learning from cats to clean 
their faces. 111 

Pycnonotus hce7norrhous, pugnacity 
of the male, 552 ; display of under 
tail coverts by the male, 512 

Pyranga cestiva, male aiding in in- 
cubation, 590 ; male characters 
in female of, 704 

Pyroses, difference of the sexes in 
colour, 452 

Q 

Quadrumana, hands of, 75 ; differ- 
ences between man and the, 231 ; 
sexual differences of colour in, 
819 ; ornamental characters of, 
837 ; analogy of sexual differences 
of, with those of man, 846 ; 
fighting of males for the females, 
855 ; monogamous habits of, 900 ; 
beards of the, 919 

Quain, R., on the variation of the 
muscles in man, 39 

Quatrefages, A. de, on the occur- 
rence of a rudimentary tail in 
man, 32 ; on variability, 44 ; on 
the moral sense as a distinction 
between man and animals, 148 ; 
civilised men stronger than 
savages, 209 ; on the fertility of 
Australian women with white 
men, 264 ; on the Paulistas of 
Brazil, 268 ; on the evolution of 
the breeds of cattle, 274 ; on the 
Jews, 299 ; on the liability of 
negroes to tropical fevers after 
residence in a cold climate, 300 ; 
on the difference between field - 
and house-slaves, 304 ; on the 
infiuence of climate on colour. 


1012 


QUECHUA. 


INDEX. 


REGENT. 


304 ; colours of annelids, 408 ; 
on the Ainos, 852 ; on the women 
of San Giuliano, 895 
Quechua, see Quichua 
Qiierqiiedula acuta, 632 
Quetelet, proportion of sexes in 
man, 375 ; relative size in man 
and woman, 376 

Quichua Indians, 50 ; local varia- 
tion of colour in the, 304 ; no 
grey hair among the, 851 : liair- 
lessness of the, 853 ; long hair of 
the, 884 

Quiscalus major, 347 ; proportions 
of the sexes of, in Florida and 
Honduras, 383 

R. 

Rabbit, white tail of the, 827 
Rabbits, domestic, elongation of 
the skull in, 84 ; modification 
of the skull in, by the lopping 
of the ear, 84 ; danger-signals of, 
153 ; numerical proportion of the 
sexes in, 381 

Races, distinctive characters of, 
258, 259 ; or species of man, 260 ; 
crossed, fertility or sterility of, 
264 ; of man, variability of the, 
269 ; of man, resemblance of, 
in mental characters, 276 ; for- 
mation of, 280 ; of man, extinc- 
tion of, 281 ; effects of the cross- 
ing of, 297 ; of man, formation of 
the, 297 ; of man, children of the, 
848 ; beardless, aversion of, to 
hairs on the face, 884 
Raffles, Sir S., on the banteng, 819 
Rafts, use of, 72, 278 
Rage, manifested by animals, 105 
liaia hatis, teeth of, 513 

clavata, female spined on tlie 

back, 508 ; sexual difference in 
the teeth of, 513 

maculata, teeth of, 513 

Rails, spur-winged, 558 
Ram, mode of fighting of the, 775 ; 
African, mane of an, 813 ; fat- 
tailed, 813 

Rameses II., features of, 261 
Ramsay, Mr., on the Australian 
musk-duck, 549 ; on the regent- 


bird, 631 ; on the incubation of 
Menura superha, 687 
Rana esculenta, vocal sacs of, 536 
Rat, common, general dispersion of, 
a consequence of superior cun- 
ning, 123 ; supplantation of the 
native in New Zealand, by the 
European rat, 297 ; common, 
said to be polygamous, 336 ; 
numerical proportion of the sexes 
in, 381 

Rats, enticed by essential oils, 809 
Rationality of birds, 625 
Rattlesnakes, difference of the sexes 
in the, 538 ; rattles as a call, 
541 

Raven, vocal organs of the, 567 ; 
stealing bright objects, 630 ; pied, 
of the Feroe Islands, 646 
Rays, prehensile organs of male, 
507 

Razor-bill, young of the, 741 
Reade, Winwood, suicide among 
savages in Africa, 179 ; mulat- 
toes not prolific, 265 ; effect of 
castration of horned sheep, 773 ; 
on the Guinea sheep, 363 ; on 
the occurrence of a mane in an 
African ram, 813 ; on singing of 
negroes, 871 ; on the negroes’ 
appreciation of the beauty of 
their women, 879 ; on the ad- 
miration of negroes for a black 
skin, 882 ; on the idea of beauty 
among negroes, 886 ; on the 
Jollofs, 895 ; on the marriage- 
customs of the negroes, 914 
Reason in animals, 114 
Redstart, American, breeding in 
immature plumage, 739 
Redstarts, new mates found by, 622 
Reduvidse, stridulation of, 432 
Reed-bunting, head-feathers of the 
male, 611 ; attacked by a bull- 
finch, 628, 629 
Reefs, fishes frequenting, 525 
Reeks, H., retention of horns by 
breeding deer, 768 ; cow rejected 
by a bull, 801 ; destruction of 
piebald rabbits by cats, 828 
Regeneration, partial, of lost parts 
in man, 10 
Regent bird, 631 


REINDEKR. 


INDEX. 


RIVALRY. 


1013 


Reindeer, horns of the, 361 ; battles 
of, 764 ; horns of the female, 
768 ; antlers of, with numerous 
points, 779 ; winter change of 
the, 828 ; sexual preferences 
shown by, 801 
Relationship, terms of, 900 
Religion, deficiency of among cer- 
tain races, 143 ; psychical ele- 
ments of, 145 

Remorse, 174 ; deficiency of, among 
savages, 202 

Rengger, on the diseases of Cebus 
Azaroe, 9 ; on the diversity of 
the mental faculties of monkeys, 
40 ; on the Payaguas Indians, 
48 ; on the inferiority of Euro- 
peans to savages in their senses, 
50 ; revenge taken by monkeys, 
105 ; on maternal affection in a 
Cehus, 106 ; on the reasoning 
powers of American monkeys, 
118 ; on the use of stones by 
monkeys for cracking hard nuts, 
123 ; on the sounds uttered by 
Cehus AzarcB, 129 ; on the signal- 
cries of monkeys, 133 ; on the 
polygamous habits of Mycetes 
caraya^ 335 ; on the voice of 
the howling monkeys, 805 ; on 
the odour of Cermis campestris, 
808 ; on the beards of Mycctes 
car ay a and Pithecia Satan as, 
811 ; on the colours of Pel is 
mitis, 816 ; on the colours of 
Cervus paludosits, 819 ; on sexual 
differences of colour in Mycetes, 
820 ; on the colour of the infant 
Guaranys, 849 ; on the early 
maturity of the female of Cehus 
Azarce, 849 ; on the beards of 
the Guaranys, 853 ; on the emo- 
tional notes employed by mon- 
keys, 871 ; on American poly- 
gamous monkeys, 900 
Representative species, of birds, 714 
Reproduction, unity of phenomena 
of, throughout the mammalia, 
10 ; period of, in birds, 738 
Reproductive system, rudimentary 
structures in the, 33 ; accessory 
parts of, 249 
Repriles, 537 


Reptiles and birds, alliance of, 255 
Resemblances, small, between man 
and the apes, 232 

Retrievers, exercise of reasoning 
faculties by, 118 

Revenge, manifested by animals, 
105 

Reversion, 54 ; perhaps the cause 
of some bad dispositions, 211 
Rhagium, difference of colour in 
the sexes of a species of, 452 
Rhamphastos carinatus, 750 
Rhea Darwinii, 731 
Rhinoceros, nakedness of, 85 ; 
horns of, 772 ; horns of, used 
defensively, 790 ; attacking white 
or grey horses, 824 
Rhynchcea, sexes and young of, 727 

australis, 727 

hengaleTisis, 727 

capensis, 728 

Rhythm, perception of, by animals, 
8'67 

Richard, M., on rudimentary mus- 
cles in man, 17 

Richardson, Sir J., on the pairing 
of Tetrao umbellus, 560 ; on 
Tetrao urophasianus, 569 ; on the 
dramming of grouse, 570, 575 ; 
on the dances of Tetrao phasian- 
ellus, 580 ; on assemblages of 
grouse, 618 ; on the battles of 
male deer, 764 ; on the reindeer, 
769 ; on the horns of the musk- 
ox, 771 ; on antlers of the rein- 
deer with numerous points, 779 ; 
on the moose, 786 ; on the Scotch 
deerhound, 788 

Richter, Jean Paul, on imagination, 
113 

Riedel, on profligate female pigeons, 
638 

Riley, Mr., on mimicry in butter- 
flies, 496 ; bird’s disgust at 
taste of certain caterpillars. 
500 

Ring-ouzel, colours and nidification 
of the, 694 

Ripa, Father, on the difficulty of 
distinguishing the races of the 
Chinese, 259 

Rivalry, in singing, between male 
birds, 565 


1014 


RIVER-HOO. 


INDEX. 


SALMON. 


River- hog, African, tusks and knobs 
of the, 7 94 

Rivers, analogy of, to islands, 245 
Roach, brightness of the male during 
breeding-season, 520 
Robbery, of strangers, considered 
honourable, 180 

Robertson, Mr., remarks on the de- 
velopment of the horns in the 
\ roebuck and red deer, 361 
Robin, pugnacity of the male, 551 ; 
autumn song of the, 566 ; female 
singing of the, 566 ; attacking 
other birds with red in their 
plumage, 629 ; young of the, 
733 

Robinet, on the difference of size of 
the male and female cocoons of 
the silk-moth, 427 
Rodents, uterus in the, 56 ; absence 
of secondary sexual characters in, 
336 ; sexual difterences in the 
colours of, 814 

Roe, winter changes of the, 828 
Rohfs, Dr., Caucasian features in 
negro, 259 ; fertility of mixed 
races in Sahara, 265 ; colours 
of birds in Sahara, 747 ; ideas 
of beauty amongst the Bornuans, 
886 

Rolle, F., on the origin of man, 4 ; 
on a change in German families 
settled ill Georgia, 304 
Roller, harsh cry of, 568 
Romans, ancient, gladiatorial exhi- 
bitions of the, 188 
Rook, voice of the, 573 
Rossler, Dr., on the resemblance of 
the lower surface of butterflies to 
the bark of trees, 477 
Rostrum, sexual difference in the 
length of in some wee^dls, 321 
Royer, Madlle., mammals giving 
suck, 252 

Rudimentary organs, 15 ; origin of, 
34 

Rudiments, presence of, in lan- 
guages, 138 

Rudolphi, on the want of connexion 
between climate and the colour 
of the skin, 298 

Ruff, supposed to be polygamous, 
339 ; proportion of the sexes in 


the, 382 ; pugnacity of the, 552 ; 
double moult in, 595, 598 ; 

duration of dances of, 617 ; at- 
traction of the, to bright objects, 
629 

Ruminants, male, disappearance 
of canine teeth in, 80, 856 ; 

generally polygamous, 335 ; 
suborbital pits of, 808 ; sexual 
differences of colour in, 816 

llupicola crocea, disjflay of plumage 
by the male, 601 

Riippell, on canine tcetli in deer 
and antelopes, 785 

Russia, numerical proportion of 
male and female births in, 332, 
375 

Fiuticilla^ 704 

Riitimeyer, Prof., on the physiog- 
nomy of the apes, 80 ; on tusks 
of miocene boar, 794 ; on the 
sexual differences of monkeys, 
854 

Rutlandshire, numerical proportion 
of male and female births in, 374 


Sachs, Prof., on the behaviour of 
the male and female elements in 
fertilisation, 343 
Sacrafices, human, 146 
Sagittal crest, in male apes and 
Australians, 849 

Sahara, fertility of mixed races in, 
265 ; birds of the, 695 ; animal 
inhabitants of the, 746 
Sailors, growth of, delayed by con- 
ditions of life, 45 ; long-sighted, 
49 

Sailors and soldiers, difference in 
the proportions of, 48 
St. John, Mr., on the attachment of 
mated birds, 626 

St. Kilda, beards of the inhabitants 
of, 852 

Salmo eriox, and S. umbla, colour- 
ing of the male, during the breed- 
ing season, 521 
Salmo lycaodoTif 511 
salar^ 511 

Salmon, leaping out of fresh water, 
164 ; male, ready to breed before 


8ALVIN. 


INDEX. 


SCHOOLCRAFT. 


1015 


the female, 327 ; proportion of 
the sexes in, 384 ; male, pugnacity 
of the, 510; male, characters 
of, during the breeding season, 
510, 521 ; spawning of the, 527 ; 
breeding of immature male, 739 
Salvin, 0., inheritance of mutilated 
feathei-s, 90, 587, 920 ; on the 
Humming-birds, 338, 692 ; on 
the numerical proportion of the 
sexes in Humming-birds, 383, 
743, 744 ; on Chamcepdes and 
Penelope, 577 ; on Sclasphorus 
platycercm, 577 ; Pipra deliciosa, 
578 ; on Chasmorhynchus, 593 
Samoa Islands, beardlessness of the 
natives of, 853, 885 
Sandhoppers, claspers of male, 417 
Sand-skipper, 414 
Sandwich Islands, variation in the 
skulls of the natives of the, 39 ; 
decrease of native population, j 
288 ; population of, 396 ; supe- 
riority of the nobles in the, 894 

Islanders, lice of, 263 

San-Giuliano, women of, 891 
Santali, recent rapid increase of the, 
67 ; Mr. Hunter on the, 297 
Saphirina, characters of the males 
of, 416 

Sarkidiornis w elanonotns, characters 
of the young, 709 

Sars, 0., on Pontoporeia affinis, 
409 

Saiurnia carpini, attraction of 
males by the female, 3S8 

lo, difference of coloration in 

the sexes of, 484 

Saturniid.oe, coloration of the, 481, 
483 

Savage, Dr., on the fighting of the 
male gorillas, 855; on the habits 
of the gorilla, 901 

Savage and Wyman on the poly- 
gamous habits of the gorilla, 335 
Savages, uniformity of, exaggerated, 
42 ; long-sighted, 49 ; rate of 
increase among, usually small, 
67 ; retention of the j)rehensile 
power of the feet by, 77 ; imita- 
tive faculties of, 133, 198 ; causes 
of low morality of, 183 ; tribes 
of, supplanting one another, 


197 ; improvements in the arts 
among, 223 ; arts of, 277 ; fond- 
ness of, for rough music, 580 ; 
oil long-enduring fashions among, 
755 ; attention paid by, to per- 
sonal appearance, 873 ; relation 
of the sexes among, 901 
Saviotti, Dr., division of malar bone, 
58 

Saw-fly, pugnacity of a male, 447 
Saw-flies, proportions of the sexes 
in, 390 

Saxicola ruhicola, young of, 743 
Scalp, motion of the, 18 
Scent-glands in snakes, 539 
Schaalf hausen. Prof., on the de- 
velopment of the posterior molars 
in different races of man, 28 ; 
on the jaw from La Naulette, 
60 ; on the correlation between 
muscularity and prominent supra- 
orbital ridges, 65 ; on the mastoid 
processes of man, 79 ; on modi- 
fications of the cranial bones, 
83 ; on human sacrifices, 222 ; 
on the probable speedy exter- 
mination of the anthropomor- 
phous apes, 242 ; on the ancient 
inhabitants of Europe, 281 ; on 
the elfects of use and disuse of 
parts, 306 ; on the superciliary 
ridge in man, 846 ; on the ab- 
sence of race-differences in the 
infant skull in man, 848 ; on 
ugliness, 890 

Schaum, H., on the elytra of Dy- 
tiscus and Hydrojjorus, 424 
Scherzer and Schwarz, measure- 
ments of savages, 851 
Schelver, on dragon-flies, 446 
Schiodte, on the stridulation of 
Hdcrocetus, 463 

Schlegel, F. von, on the complexity 
of the languages of uncivilised 
peoples, 139 

Prof., on Tanysiptera, 714 

Schleicher, Prof., on the origin of 
language, 132 

Schomburgk, Sir R., on the pug- 
nacity of the male musk-duck of 
Guiana, 554 ; on the courtship 
of Rupicola crocea, 601 
Schoolcraft, Mr., on the difficulty 


1016 


SCHOPENHAUER. 


INDEX. 


SELF-COMMAND. 


of fashioning stone implements, 
74 

Schopenhauer, on importance of 
courtship to mankind, 893 
Schweinfurth, complexion of ne- 
groes, 847 
Scicena aquila, 532 
Sclater, P. L. , on modified secondary 
wing-feathers in the males of 
Pipra, 578, 579 ; on elongated 
feathers in nightjars, 586 ; on 
the species of ChasmorhyTichus, 
593 ; on the plumage of Pelecanus 
onocrotalus, 599 ; on the plan- 
tain-eaters, 701 ; on the sexes 
and young of Tadorna variegata, 
731 ; on the colours of Lemur 
macaco^ 819 ; on the stripes in 
asses, 836, 837 

Scolecida, absence of secondary sex- 
ual characters in, 400 
Scolopax frenata^ tail-feathers of, 
576 

gallinago, drumming of, 575 

javensis, tail-feathers of, 576 

major, assemblies of, 618 

Wilsonii, sound produced by, 

576 

Scolytus, stridulation of, 463 
Scoter-duck, black, sexual difference 
in coloration of the, 749 ; bright 
beak of male, 749 

Scott, Dr., on idiots smelling then 
food, 54 

, J., on the colour of the beard 

in man, 850 

Scrope, on the pugnacity of the 
male salmon, 510 ; on the battles 
of stags, 764 

Scudder, S, H., imitation of the 
stridulation of the Orthoptera, 
435 ; on the stridulation of the 
Acridiidse, 440 ; on a Devonian 
insect, 443 ; on stridulation, 862 
Sculpture, expression of the ideal 
of beauty by, 886 

Sea-anemones, bright colours of, 
401 

Sea-bear, polygamous, 337 
Sea-elephant, male, structure of the 
nose of the, 806 ; polygamous, 
337 

Sea-lion, polygamous, 337 


Seal, bladder-nose, 806 
Seals, their sentinels generally fe- 
males, 153 ; evidence furnished 
by, on classification, 231 ; poly- 
gamous habits of, 337 ; battles 
of male, 764 ; canine teeth of 
male, 766 ; sexual differences, 
787 ; pairing of, 797 ; sexual 
peculiarities of, 806 ; in the 
coloration of, 816 ; appreciation 
of music by, 866 

Sea-scorpion, sexual differences in, 
515 

Season, changes of colour in birds, 
in accordance with the, 594 ; 
changes of plumage of birds in 
relation to, 704 

Seasons, inheritance at correspond- 
ing, 354 

Sebituani, African chief, trying to 
alter a fashion, 876 
Sebright Bantam, 368 
Secondary sexual characters, 319 ; 
relations of polygamy to, 334 ; 
transmitted through both sexes, 
348 ; gradation of, in birds, 655 
Sedgwick, W., on hereditary ten- 
dency to produce twins, 67 
Seemann, Dr., on the different ap- 
preciation of music by different 
peoples, 868 ; on the effects of 
music, 870 

Seidlitz, on horns of reindeer, 772 
Selasphorus platycercus, acuminate 
first primary of the male, 577 
Selby, P. J., on the habits of the 
black and red grouse, 338 
Selection as applied to primeval 
man, 4 

Selection, double, 348 
, injurious forms of, in civil- 
ised nations, 206 

of male by female birds, 616, 

641 

, methodical, of Prussian grena- 
diers, 42 

, sexual, explanation of, 322, 

328, 340 ; influence of, on the 
colouring of Lepidoptera, 491 
, sexual and natural, con- 
trasted, 349 

Self-command, habit of, inherited, 
177 ; estimation of, iM 


SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 


INDEX. 


SIEBOLD. 


1017 


Self-consciousness, in animals, 126 
Self-preservation, instinct of, 171 
Self-sacrifice, by savages, 170; es- 
timation of, 181 
Semilunar fold, 24 
Sannopithecus, 237 ; long hair on 
the heads of species of, 232, 921 

chrysomelas, sexual differences 

of colour in, 820 

comatus, ornamental hair on 

the head of, 838 

frontatus, beard, «fec., of, 839 

nasica, nose of, 232 

nemceus, colouring of, 841 

ruhvmndxLSf ornamental hair 

on the head of, 836 
Senses, inferiority of Europeans to 
savages in the, 50 
Sentinels, among animals, 153, 
163 

Serpents, instinctively dreaded by 
apes and monkeys, 101, 108 
Serranus, hermaphroditism in, 250 
Setina, noise produced by, 471 
Sex, inheritance limited by, 355 
Sexes, relative proportions of, in 
man, 374, 849 ; proportions of, 
sometimes influenced by selec- 
tion, 393 ; probable relation of 
the, in primeval man, 901 
Sexual and natural selection, con- 
trasted, 349 

characters, effects of the loss 

of, 356 ; limitation of, 357 

characters, secondaiy, 319 ; 

relations of polygamy {o, 334 ; 
transmitted through both sexes, 
348 ; ^adation of, in birds, 655 
Sexual differences in man, 11 

selection, explanation of, 322, 

328, 340 ; influence of, on the 
colouring of Lepidoptera, 491 ; 
objections to, 755 ; action of, in 
mankind, 908 

selection in spidem, 418 

selection, supplemental note 

on, 948 

similarity, 393 

Shaler, Prof., sizes of sexes in whales, 
787 

Shame, 174 

Sharks, prehensile organs of male, 
507 


Sharpe, Dr., Europeans in the 
tropics, 303 

, R. B., on Tanysiptera sylvia, 

688 ; on Ceryle, 697 ; on the 
young male of Dacelo Gaudi- 
chaudi, 713 

Shaw, Air., on the pugnacity of the 
male salmon, 510 

, J. , on the decorations of birds, 

584 

Sheep, danger-signals of, 153 ; 
sexual differences in the homs of, 
355 ; horns of, 362, 771 ; do- 
mestic, sexual differences of, 
late developed, 367 ; numerical 
proportion of the sexes in, 380 ; 
inheritance of homs by one sex, 
771 ; effect of castration, 773 ; 
mode of fighting of, 776 ; arched 
foreheads of some, 813 

Merino, loss of homs in fe- 

1 males of, 356 ; horns of, 363 
; Shells, difference in form of, in 
; male and female Gasteropoda, 
404 ; beautiful colours and 
i shapes of, 406 
Shield-drake, pairing with a com- 
mon duck, 632 ; New Zealand, 
sexes and young of, 731 
Shooter, J., on the Kaffirs, 883 ; 
on the marriage-customs of the 
Kaffirs, 883 

Shrew-mice, odour of, 807 
Shrike, Drongo, 703 
Shrikes, characters of young, 709 
Shuckard, W. E., on sexual differ- 
ences in the vings of Hymenop- 
tera, 426 

Shyness of adorned male birds, 613 
Siagonium, proportions of the sexes 
in, 390 ; dimorphism in males of, 
458 

Siam, proportion of male and fe- 
births in, 378 

Siamese, general beardlessness of 
the, 852 ; notions of beauty of 
the, 881 ; hairy family of, 9i8 
Sidgwick, H., on morality in hypo- 
thetical bee community, 152 ; 
our actions not entirely directed 
by pain and pleasure, 184 
SieWd, C. T. von, on the propor- 
tion of sexes in the Apnis, 392 ; 


1018 


SIOHT. 


INDEX. 


SOCIARTLITT. 


on the auditory apparatus of the 
stridulent Orthoptera, 436 
Sight, inheritance of long and short, 
49 

Signal-cries of monkeys, 133 
Silk-moth, proportion of the sexes 
in, 385, 387 ; Ailanthus, Prof. 
Canestrini, on the destniction of 
its larvae by wasps, 387 ; differ- 
ence of size of the male and female 
cocoons of the, 427 ; pairing of 
the, 487 

Simiadse, 235 ; their origin and 
divisions, 255 
Similarity, sexual, 347 
Singing, of the Cicadae and Fulgo- 
ridae, 433 ; of tree-frogs, 536 ; of 
birds, object of the, 563 
Sirenia, nakedness of, 85 
Sirexjuvencus, 448 
Siricidae, difference of the sexes in, 
448 

Siskin, 600 ; pairing with a canary, 
633 

Sitana, throat-pouch of the males 
of, 544, 547 

Size, relative, of tlie sexes of insects, 
427 

Skin, dark colour of, a protection 
against heat, 303 

Skin, movement of the, 18 ; naked- 
ness of, in man, 85 ; colour of 
the, 299 

and hair, correlation of colour 

of, 306 

Skull, variation of, in man, 38 ; 
cubic contents of, no absolute test 
of intellect, 82 ; Neanderthal, 
capacity of the. 82 ; causes of 
modification of the, 83 ; ditierence 
of, in form and capacity, in 
different races of men, 261 ; 
variability of the shape of ihe, 
270 ; differences .of, in the sexes 
in man, 847 ; artificial modifica- 
tion of the shape of, 875 
Skunk, odour emitted by the, 
807 ; white tail of, protective, 829 
Slavery, prevalence of, 180 ; of 
women, 905 

Slaves, difference between field- and 
house-slaves, 305 
Sloth, ornaments of male, 815 


Smell, sense of, in man and animals, 
24 

Smith, Adam, on the basis of 
sympathy, 162 

Sir A. , on the recognition of 

women by male Cynocephali, 11 ; 
on revenge by a baboon, 105 ; on 
an instance of memory in a ba- 
boon, 112 ; on the retention of 
their colour by the Dutch in 
South Africa, 299 ; on the poly- 
gamy of the South African ante- 
lopes, 335 ; on the polygamy of 
the lion, 337 ; on the proportion 
of the sexes in Kohus ellipsipt'ym- 
nus, 381 ; on Bucephalus capcn- 
sis, 538 ; on South African lizards 
547 ; on fighting gnus, 764 ; on 
the horns of rhinoceroses, 772 ; 
on the fighting of lions, 794 ; on 
the colours of the Cape Eland, 

817 ; on the colours of the gnu, 

818 ; on Hottentot notions of 
beauty, 881 ; disbelief in com- 
munistic marriages, 896, 897 

, F. , on the Cynipidse and Ten- 

thredinidae, 390 ; on the relative 
size of tlie sexes of Aculeate Hy- 
menoptera, 429 ; on the difference 
between the sexes of ants and 
bees, 449 ; on the stridulation of 
Trox sabulosus, 464 ; on the 
stridulation of Mononychus pscu- 
dacori, 467 

Smynthurus luteus, courtship of, 430 
Snakes, sexual differences of, 538 ; 
mental powers of, 539 ; male, 
ardency of, 539 
“ Snarling muscles, ” 61 
Snipe, drumming of the, 575 ; 
coloration of the, 748 

, painted, sexes and young of, 

727 

, solitaiy, assemblies of, 618 

Snipes, arrival of male before the 
female, 327 ; pugnacity of male, 
554 ; double moult in, 594 
SnoAv-goose, whiteness of the, 751 
Sociability, the sense of duty con- 
nected with, 150 ; impulse to, in 
animals, 161 ; manifestations of, 
in man, 166 ; instinct of, in 
animals, 167 


SOCIAL. 


INDEX. 


SPROAT. 


1019 


Social animals, affection of, for 
each other, 156 ; defence of, by 
the males, 164 

Sociality, probable, of primeval 
men, 94 ; influence of, on the 
development of the intellectual 
faculties, 197 ; origin of, in man, 
199 

Soldiers, American, measurements 
of, 42 

and sailors, difference in the 

proportions of, 48 

Solenostoma, bright colours and 
mareupial sac of the females of, 
630 

Song, of male birds appreciated by 
their females, 141 ; want of, in 
brilliant plumaged bii’ds, 610 ; 
of bii'ds, 686 
Sorex, odour of, 807 
Sounds, admired alike by man and 
animals, 141 ; produced by 
fishes, 531 ; produced by male 
frogs and toads, 536 ; instru- 
mentally produced by birds, 574 
et seq. 

Spain, decadence of, 217 
Sparassus smaragdulus, difference 
of colour in the sexes of, 418 
Sparrow, pugnacity of the male, 
551 ; acquisition of the Linnet’s 
song by a, 567 ; coloration of the, 
723 ; immature plumage of the, 7 1 2 

, white-crowned, young of tlie, 

741 

SpaiTOWs, house- and tree, 693, 737 

, new mates found by, 622 

, sexes and young of, 737 ; 

learning to sing, 869 
Spathura Undcrwoodi, 591 
Spawning of fishes, 523, 528 
Spear, used before dispersion of 
man, 278 

Species, causes of the advancement 
of, 211 ; distinctive characters 
of, 258 ; or races of man, 260 ; 
sterility and fertility of, wlien 
crossed, 264 ; supposed, of man, 
270 ; gradation of, 271 ; diffi- 
culty of defining, 271 ; represen- 
tative, of birds, 714 ; of birds, 
comparative dififerences between 
the sexes of distinct, 716 


Spectrum femoratum, difference of 
colour in the sexes of, 444 
Speech, connection between the 
brain and the faculty of, 134 ; 
connection of intonation mth 
music, 871 

“ Spel ” of the black-cock, 573 
Spencer, Herbert, on the influence 
of food on the size of the jaAvs, 
49 ; on the dawn of intelligence, 
101 ; on the origin of the belief 
in spiritual agencies, 144 ; on the 
origin of the moral sense, 189 ; 
on music, 870, 871, 872 
Spengel, disagrees with explanation 
of man’s hairlessness, 919 
Sperm-whales, battles of male, 764 
Sphingidse, coloration of the, 481 
Sphinx, Humming-bird, 485 

, Mr. Bates on the caterpillar 

of a, 499 

Sphinx moth, musky o(h)ur of, 
472 

Spiders, 417 ; parental feeling in, 
1 62 ; male, more active than 
female, 341 ; proportion of the 
sexes in, 392 ; secondary sexual 
characters of, 418 ; courtship of 
male, 419 ; attracted by music, 
421 ; male, small size of, 419 
Spilosoma menthastri, rejected by 
turkeys, 484 

Spine, alteration of, to suit the 
erect attitude of man, 79 
Spirits, fondness of monkeys for, 9 
Spiiitual agencies, belief in, almost 
universal, 143 
Spiza cyanea and ciris, 629 
Spoonbill, 572 ; Chinese, change of 
plumage in, 703 

Spots, retained throughout groups 
of birds, 651 ; disappearance of, 
in adult mammals, 834 



Spring-hoc, horns of the, 777 
Sproat, Mr., on the extinction of 
savages in Vancouver Island, 283 ; 
on the eradication of facial hair 
by the natives of Vancouver 
Island, 884 ;* on the eradication 
of the beard by the Indians of 
Vancouver Island, 884 


1020 


SPURS. 


INDEX. 


STONES. 


Spurs, occurrence of, in female 
fowls, 351, 356; development of, 
in various species of Phasianidse, 
364 ; of Gallinaceous birds, 555, 
557 ; development of, in female 
Gallinacese, 685 

Squilla, different colours of the 
sexes of a species of, 416 

Squirrels, battles of male, 763 ; 
African, sexual differences in the 
colouring of, 814 ; black, 824 

Stag, long hairs of the throat of, 
796 ; horns of the, 350, 354 ; 
battles of, 764 ; horns of the, 
with numerous branches, 779 ; 
bellowing of the, 803 ; crest of 
the, 810 

-beetle, numerical proportion 

of sexes of, 390 ; use of jaws, 
423 ; large size of male, 428 ; 
weapons of the male, 459 

Staintou, H. T., on the numerical 
proportion of the sexes in the 
smaller moths, 387 ; habits of 
ElacMsta rufodnerea, 388 ; on 
the ‘ coloration of moths, 482 ; 
on the rejection of Spilosoma 
menthastri by turkeys, 484 ; on 
the sexes of A gratis exclama- 
iionis, 484 

Staley, Bishop, mortality of infant 
Maories, 290 

Stallion, mane of the, 796 

Stallions, two, attacking a third, 
154 ; fighting, 765 ; small canine 
teeth of, 785 

Stansbury, Capt., observations on 
pelicans, 156 

Staphylinidae, hornlike processes in 
male, 458 

Starfishes, parental feeling in, 162 ; 
bright colours of some, 401 

Stark, Dr., on the death-rate in 
towns and rural districts, 213 ; 
on the influence of marriage or 
mortality, 214 ; on the higher 
mortality of males in Scotland, 
376 

Starling, American field-, pugna- 
city of male, 562 

, red-winged, Selection of a 

mate by the female, 634 

Starlings, three, frequenting the 


same nest, 338, 623 ; new mates 
found by, 623 

Statues, Greek, Egyptian, Assyrian, 
&c., contrasted, 886 
Stature, dependence of, upon local 
influences, 45 

Staudinger, Dr. , on breeding Lepid- 
optera, 387 ; his list of Lepid- 
optera, 388 

Staunton, Sir G., hatred of inde- 
cency a modern virtue, 1 82 
Stealing of bright objects by birds, 
630 

Stebbing, T. R., on the nakedness 
of the human body, 916 
Stemmatopus, 807 
Stendhal, see Bombet 
Stenohothrus pratorum stridulation, 
439 

Stephen, Mr. L., on the difference 
in the minds of men and animals, 
120 ; on general concepts in 
animals, 136 ; distinction be- 
tween material and formal mo- 
rality, 169 

Sterility, general, of sole daughters, 
208 ; when crossed, a distinc- 
tive character of species, 258 ; 
under changed conditions, 293, 
296 

Sterna, seasonal change of plumage 
in, 751 

Stickle-back, polygamous, 340 ; 
male, courtship of the, 509 ; male, 
brilliant colouring of, during the 
breeding season, 521 ; nidification 
of the, 528 

Sticks used as implements and 
weapons by monkeys, 123 
Sting in bees, 320 
Stokes, Capt. , on the habits of the 
great bower-bird, 583 
Stoliczka, Dr., on colours in snakes, 
539 

Stoliczka, on the pre-anal pores of 
lizards, 542 

Stonechat, young of the, 743 
Stone implements, difficulty of 
making, 74 ; as traces of extinct 
tribes, 281 

Stones, used by monkeys for break- 
ing hard fruits and as missiles, 
75 ; piles of, 277 


STORK. 


INDEX. 


TAIL. 


1021 


Stork, black, sexual differences in 
the bronchi of the, 572 ; red 
beak of the, 749 

Storks, 749, 752 ; sexual differ- 
ence in the colour of the eyes of, 
649 

Strange, Mr., on the satin bower- 
bird, 583 

SLrepsiceros kudu, horns of, 782 ; 
markings of, 830 

Stretch, Mr., on the numerical pro- 
portion in the sexes of chickens, 
381 

Stridulation, by males of Theri- 
dion, 420 ; of Hemiptera, 432 ; 
of the Ortho ptera and Homoptera 
discussed, 443 ; of beetles, 462 
Stripes, retained throughout groups 
of birds, 651 ; disappearance of, 
in adult mammals, 834 
Strix flamiTiea, 622 
Structure, existence of unservice- 
able modifications of, 92 
Struggle for existence, in man, 219, 
225 

Struthers, Dr., on the occurrence of 
the supra condyloid foramen in 
the humerus of man, 30 
Sturnella ludoviciana, pugnacity of 
the male, 562 
Sturnus vulgaris, 623 
Sub-species, 271 

Suffering, in strangers, indifference 
of savages to, 180 

Suicide, 211 ; formerly not re- 
garded as a crime, 179; rarely 
practised among the lowest 
savages, 180 

Suidae, stripes of young, 708 
Sulivan, Sir B. J., on speaking 
of parrots, 130 ; on two stallious 
attacking a third, 765 
Sumatra, compression of the nose 
by the Malays of, 888 
Sumner, Archb., man alone cap- 
able of progressive improvement, 
121 

Sun-birds, nidification of, 692 
Superciliary ridge in man, 846, 849 
Supernumerary digits, more fre- 
quent in men than in women, 
345 ; inheritance of, 358 ; early 
development of, 366 


Superstitions, 222 ; prevalence of, 
186 

Superstitious customs, 146 
Supra-condyloid foramen in the 
early progenitors of man, 248 
Suspicion, prevalence of, among 
animals, 104 

Swallow-tail butterfly, 478 
Swallows deserting their young, 
165, 173 

Swan, black, wild, trachea of the, 
572 ; white, young of, 736 ; red 
beak of the, 749 ; black-necked, 
753 

Swans, 749, 753 ; young, 734 
Swaysland, Mr., on the arrival of 
migratory birds, 327 
Swifts, migration of, 165 
Swinhoe, R., on the common rat in 
Formosa and China, 123 ; be- 
haviour of lizards when caught, 
544 ; on the sounds produced by 
the male hoopoe, 575 ; on Dicru- 
rus ruacrocercus and the spoon- 
bill, 703 ; on the young of 
Ardeola, 715 ; on the habits of 
Turnix, 727 ; on the habits of 
lihynchcea hengalensis, 727 ; on 
Orioles breeding in immature 
plumage, 739 

Sylvia atricapilla, young of, 742 

cinerea, aerial love-dance of 

the male, 581 

Sympathy, 206 ; among animals, 
155; its suppossed basis, 162 
Sympatliies, gradual wddeniug of, 
188 

Syngnathous fishes, abdominal 
pouch in male, 251 
Sypheotides auritus, acuminated 
primaries of the male, 577 ; ear- 
tufts of, 587 

T 

Tabanidae, habits of, 321 
Tadorna variegata, sexes and young 
of, 731 

vulpanser, 632 

Tahitians, 223 ; compression of 
the nose by the, 888 
Tail, rudimentary, occurrence of, 
in man, 32 ; convoluted body in 


1022 


TAIT. 


INDEX. 


TKTRAO. 


the extremity of the, 33 ; ab- 
sence of, in man and the higher 
apes, 87 ; variability of, in 
species of Macacus and in baboons, 
87 ; presence of, in the early pro- 
genitors of man, 248 ; length of, 
in pheasants, 678, 687, 688 ; 

difference of length of the, in the 
two sexes of birds, 687 
Tait, Lawson, on the effects of 
natural selection on civilised 
nations, 205 

Tanager, scarlet, variation in the 
male, 646 

Tanagra cestiva, age of mature plu- 
mage in, 738 

Tanagra rubra, 646 ; young of, 743 
Tanais, absence of mouth in the 
males of some species of, 321 ; 
relations of the sexes in, 392 ; 
dimorphic males of a species of, 
409 

Tankerville, Earl, on the battles of 
wild hulls, 764 

Tanysiptera, races of, determined 
from adult males, 714 

Sylvia, long tail-feathers of, 

688 

Taphroderes distortus, enlarged left 
mandible of the male, 425 
Tapirs, longitudinal stripes of 
young, 708, 833 

Tarsi, dilatation of front, in male 
beetles, 424 
Tarsius, 241 

Tasmania, half-castes killed by the 
natives of, 264 

Tasmanians, extinction of, 284 
Taste, in the Quadrumana, 826 
Tattooing, 276 ; universality of, 
875 

Taylor, G., on Quiscalus major, 383 
Taylor, Rev. R., on tattooing in 
New Zealand, 878 
Tea, fondness of monkeys for, 9 
Teal, constancy of, 626 
Tear-sacs, of Ruminants, 808 
Teebay, Mr., on changes of plumage 
in spangled Hamburg fowls, 353 
Teeth, rudimentaiy incisor, in 
Ruminants, 16 ; posterior molar, 
in man, 28 ; wisdom, 28 ; diver- 
sity of, 39 ; canine, in the early 


progenitors of man, 248 ; canine, 
of male mammals, 766 ; in man, 
reduced by correlation, 856 ; 
staining of the, 875 ; front, 
knocked out or filed by some 
savages, 876 

Tegetmeier, Mr., on the transmis- 
sion of colours in pigeons by one 
sex alone, 358 ; numerical pro- 
portion of male and female births 
in dogs, 379 ; on the abundance 
of male pigeons, 382 ; on the 
wattles of game-cocks, 614 ; on 
the courtship of fowls, 635 ; on 
the loves of pigeons, 636 ; on 
dyed pigeons, 637 ; blue dragon 
pigeons, 680 

Tembeta, S. American ornament, 
877 

Temper, in dogs and horses, in- 
herited, 105 

Tench, proportions of the sexes in 
tlie, 385 ; brightness of male, 
during breeding season, 520 
Tenebrionidse, stridulation of, 463 
Tennent, Sir J. E., on the tusks 
of the Ceylon jElephant, 774, 
786 ; on the frequent absence of 
beard in the natives of Ceylon, 
852 ; on the Chinese opinion of 
the aspect of the Cingalese, 880 
Tennyson, A., on the control of 
thought, 188 

Tenthredinidae, proportions of the 
sexes in, 390 ; fighting habits 
of male, 447 ; difference of the 
sexes in, 448 

Tephrodornis, young of, 714 
Terai, in India, 282 
Termites, habits of, 447 
Terns, white, 751 ; and black, 752 

■ seasonal change of plumage 

in, 751 

Terror, common action of, upon the 
lower animals and man, 104 
Testudo elegans, 537 
nigra, 537 

Tetrao cupido, battles of, 562 ; 
sexual difference in the vocal 
organs of, 568 

phasiandlus, dances of, 580 ; 

duration of dances of, 617 
scuticus, 694, 709, 719 


TETRAO. 


INDEX. 


TRACHEA. 


1023 


Ttirao tetrix, 694, 709, 719 ; pug- 
nacity of the male, 556 

umhellus, pairing of, 562 ; 

battles of, 562 ; drumming of 
the male, 574 

urogalloides, dances of, 617 

urogallus, pugnacity of the 

male, 556 

urophasianus, inflation of the 

oesophagus in the male, 569 
ThamnoMa, young of, 714 
Thecia, sexual diflerences of colour- 
ing in species of, 475 

'nihi, protective colouring of, 

477 

Thecophora fovea, 471 
Theognis, selection in mankind, 43 
Tkeridion, stridulation of males of, 
420 

lineatiim, 419 

Thomisus citreus, and T. floricolens, 
difference of colour in the sexes 
of, 418 

Thompson, J. H., on the battles of 
sperm-whales, 764 

, \V., on the colouring of the 

male char during the breeding 
season, 521 ; on the pugnacity 
of the males of Gallinula chloro- 
pus, 552 ; on the finding of new 
mates by magpies, 620 ; on the 
finding of new mates by Peregrine 
falcons, 621, 622 

Thorax, processes of, in male beetles, 
452 

Thorell, T., on the proportion of 
sexes in spiders, 392 
Thoniback, difference in the teeth 
of the two sexes of the, 513 
Thoughts, control of, 188 
Thrush, pairing with a blackbird, 
631 ; colours and nidification of 
the, 693 

Thrushes, characters of young, 693, 
. 709 

Thug, remorse of a, 180 
Thumb, absence of, in Aides and 
Hylobates, 76 

Thury, M., on the numerical pro- 
portion of male and female births 
among the Jews, 375 
Thylacinus, possession of the mar- 
supial sac by the male, 249 


Thysanura, 429 

Tibia, dilated, of the male Crabro 
cribrarius, 424 

and femur, proportions of, in 

the Aymara Indians, 51 
Tierra del Fuego, marriage-customs 
of, 912 

Tiger, colours and markings of the, 
832 

Tigers, depopulation of districts by, 
in India, 69 

Tillus elongatus, difference of colour 
in the sexes of, 452 
Timidity, variability of, in the same 
species, 105 
Tinea vulgaris, 385 
Tipula, pugnacity of male, 431 
Tits, sexual difference of colour in, 
698 

Toads, 534 ; male, treatment of 
ova by some, 252 ; male, ready 
to breed before the female, 327 
Todas, infanticide and proportion 
of sexes, 393 ; practise poly- 
andry, 905 ; choice of hus- 
bands amongst, 905 
Toe, great, condition of, in the 
human embryo, 15 
Tomicus villosus, proportion of the 
sexes in, 390 

Tomtit, blue, sexual difference of 
colour in the, 698 

Tonga Islands, beardlessness of the 
natives of, 853, 885 
Tooke, Horne, on language, 131 
Tools, flint, 223; used by mon- 
keys, 123 ; use of, 72 
Topknots in birds, 589 
Tortoise, voice of the male, 863 
Tortures, submitted to by Ame- 
rican savages, 181 
Totanus, double moult in, 594 
Toucans, colours and nidification 
of the, 694 ; beaks and ceres 
of the, 750 

Towns, residence in, a cause of 
diminished stature, 46 
Toynbee, J. , on the external shell 
of the ear in man, 20 
Trachea, convoluted and imbedded 
in the sternum, in some birds, 
671, 572 ; structure of the, in 
Rhynchaxi, 727 


1024 


TRADES. 


INDEX. 


TURNER. 


Trades, aflecting the form of the 
skull, 83 

Tragela'phus, sexual differences of 
colour in, 817 

scriptus, dorsal crest of, 810 ; 

markings of, 829 

Tragopan, 339 ; swelling of the 
wattles of the male, during court- 
ship, 584 ; display of plumage 
by the male, 605, 606 ; marking 
of the sexes of the, 653 
Tragops diapar, sexual difference 
in the colour of, 538 
Training, effect of, on the mental 
difference between the sexes of 
man, 860 

Transfer of male characters to female 
birds, 718 

Transmission, equal, of ornamental 
characters, to both sexes in mam- 
mals, 827 

Traps, avoidance of, by animals, 
121 ; use of, 72 

Treachery, to comrades, avoidance 
of, by savages, 170 
Trtmex columboe, 449 
Tribes, extinct, 197 ; extinction of, 
282 

TricMus, difference of colour in the 
sexes of a species of, 452 
Trigla, 532 

Trigonocephalus, noise made by 
tail of, 542 

Trimen, K., on the proportion of 
the sexes in South African butter- 
flies, 386 ; on the attraction of 
males by the female Lasiocampa 
quercus, 388 ; on Pneumora, 441 ; 
on difference of colour in the 
sexes of beetles, 452 ; on moths 
brilliantly coloured beneath, 483 ; 
on mimicry in butterflies, 496, 
497 ; on Qynanisa Isis, and on 
the ocellated spots of Lepidoptera, 
652 ; on Cyllo Leda, 653 
Tringa, sexes and young of, 740 
cornuta, 596 

Triphcena, coloration of the species 
of, 480 

Tristram, H. B., on unhealthy dis- 
tricts in North Africa, 301 ; on 
the habits of the chaffinch in 
l^alestine, 383 ; on the birds of 


the Sahara, 695 ; on the animals 
inhabiting the Sahara, 746 
Triton cristatus, 533 

palmipes, 533 

punctatus, 533, 534 

Troglodyte skulls, greater than 
those of modern Frenchmen, 82 
Troglodytes vulgaris, 723 
Trogons, colours and nidification of 
the, 694 

Tropic - birds, white only when 
mature, 751 

Tropics, freshwater fishes of the, 
525 

Trout, proportion of the sexes in, 
384 ; male, pugnacity of the, 510 
Trox sabulosus, stridulation of, 464 
Tinith, not rare between members 
of the same tribe, 180 ; more 
highly appreciated by certain 
tribes, 187 

Tulloch, Major, on the immunity 
of the negro from certain fevers, 
300 

Tumbler, almond, change of plu- 
mage in the, 367 

Turdus merula, 693 ; young of, 742 

migratorius, 709 

musicus, 693 

polyglottus, young of, 742 

torquatus, 693 

Turkey, wild, pugnacity of young 
male, 560 ; wild, notes of the, 
572 ; swelling of the wattles of 
the male, 584 ; variety of, with 
a top-knot, 589 ; recognition of 
a dog by a, 628 ; male, wild, ac- 
ceptable to domesticated females, 
638 ; wild, first advances made 
by older females, 640 ; wild, 
breast-tuft of bristles of the, 703 
Turkey-cock, scraping of the Avings 
of, upon the ground, 573 ; wild, 
display of plumage by, 601 : fight- 
ing habits of, 614 

Turner, Prof. W., on muscular fas- 
ciculi in man referable to the 
panniculus carnosus, 18 ; on the 
occurrence of the supra-condyloid 
foramen in the human humerus, 
31 ; on muscles attached to the 
cocoyx in man, 33 ; on ih^filum 
terminable in man, 33 ; on the 


TURNIX. 


INDEX. 


VERTKBRiE. 


1025 


variability of the muscles, 39 ; 
on abnormal conditions of the 
human uterus, 57 ; on the de- 
velopment of the mammary 
glands, 250 ; on male fishes 
hatching ova in their mouths, 
251, 529 ; on the external 

perpendicular fissure of the brain, 
310 ; on the bridging convolu- 
tions in the brain of a chimpanzee, 
311 

Turnix^ sexes of some species of, 
726, 733 

Turtle-dove, cooing of the, 572 
Tuttle, H., on the number of species 
of man, 270 

Tylor, E. B., on emotional cries, 
gestures, &c., of man, 130 ; on 
the origin of the belief in spiri- 
tual agencies, 144 ; remorse for 
violation of tribal usage in 
marrying, 176 ; on the primitive 
barbarism of civilised nations, 
221 ; on the origin of counting, 
221 ; inventions of savages, 
223 ; on resemblances, of the 
mental characters in different 
races of man, 276 

lYpe of structure, prevalence of, 
253 

TyphxEUs^ stridulating organs of, 
462 ; stridulation of, 464 
Twins, tendency to produce, here- 
ditary, 67 

Twite, proportion of the sexes in 
the, 383 

U 

Ugliness, said to consist in an ap- 
proach to the lower animals, 890 
Umbrella-bird, 571 
C/m6nna, sounds produced by, 532 
United States, rate of increase in, 
66 ; influence of natural selec- 
tion on the progress of, 218 ; 
change undergone by Europeans 
in the, 304 

Upupa epopSy sounds produced by 
the male, 675 

Uraniidse, coloration of the, 481 
Uria troile^ variety of ( = J7. lacry- 
mans), 647 
Urodela, 532 

3 


Urosticte Benjamini, sexual differ- 
ences in, 673 

Use and disuse of parts, effects of, 
47 ; influence of, on the races of 
man, 305 

Uterus, reversion in the, 56 ; 
more or less divided, in the 
human subject, 56, 64 ; double, 
in the early progenitors of man, 
249 

V 

Vaccination, influence of, 206 
Vancouver Island, Mr Sproat on 
the savages of, 283 ; natives of, 
eradication of facial hair by the, 
884 

Vanellus cristatus, wing tubercles 
of the male, 558 

Vanessce, 472 ; resemblance of lower 
surface of, to bark of trees, 477 
Variability, causes of, 41 ; in man, 
analogous to that in the lower 
animals, 43 ; of the races of man, 
269 ; greater in men than in 
women, 344 ; period of, relation 
of the, to sexual selection, 371 ; 
of birds, 643 ; of secondary 
sexual characters in man, 851 
Variation, laws of, 43 ; correlated, 
64 ; in man, 225 ; analogous, 
235 ; analogus, in plumage of 
birds, 588 

Variations, spontaneous, 65 
Varieties, absence of, between two 
species, evidence of their dis- 
tinctness, 258 

Variety, an object in nature, 752 
et seq. 

Variola, communicable between 
man and the lower animals, 9 
Vaur6al, human bones from, 32 
Veddahs, monogamous habits of, 902 
Veitch, Mr., on the aversion of Ja- 
panese ladies to whiskers, 885 
Vengeance, instinct of, 173 
Venus Erycina, priestesses of, 894 
Vermes, 407 

Vermiform appendage, 29 
Verreaux, M., on the attraction of 
numerous males by the female of 
an Australian Borribyx, 388 
Vertebrae, caudal, number of, in 

U. 


1026 


VERT16BRATA. 


INDEX. 


WALLACE. 


macaques and baboons, 87 ; of 
monkeys, partly imbedded in the 
body, 88 

Vertebrata, 507 ; common origin of 
the, 244 ; most ancient progeni- 
tors of, 249 ; origin of the voice 
in air-breathing, 863 
Vesicula prostatica, the homologue 
of the uterus, 34, 249 
Vibiissse, represented by long hairs 
in the eyebrows, 26 
Vidua, 613, 705 

aaeillaris, 338 

Villerm6, M., on the influence of 
plenty upon stature, 46 
Vinson, Aug., courtship of male 
spider, 419 ; on the male of 
Epeira nigra, 419 
Viper, difference of the sexes in the, 
638 

Virey, on the number of species of 
man, 270 

Virtues, originally social only, 
178 ; gradual appreciation of, 
201 

Viscera, variability of, in man, 40 
Vlacovich, Prof., on the ischio- 
pubic muscle, 61 
Vocal music of birds, 562 

organs of man, 133 ; of birds, 

130, 686 ; of frogs, 536 ; of the 
Insessores, 567 ; difference of, in 
the sexes of birds, 568 ; primarily 
used in relation to the propaga- 
tion of the species, 862 
Vogt, Karl, on the origin of species, 
1 ; on the origin of man, 4 ; 
on the semilunar fold in man, 
24 ; on microcephalous idiots, 
53 ; on the imitative faculties of 
microcephalous idiots, 133 ; on 
skulls from Brazilian caves, 
261 ; on the evolution of the races 
of man, 274 ; on the formation 
of the skull in women, 848 ; 
on the Ainos and negroes, 852 ; 
on the increased cranial differ- 
ence of the sexes in man with 
race development, 861 ; on the 
obliquity of the eye in the Chinese 
and Japanese, 880 
Voice in mammals, 802 ; in mon- 
keys and man, 849 ; in man. 


861 ; origin of, in air-breathing 
vertebrates, 863 
Von Baer, see Baer 
Vulpian, Prof., on the resemblance 
between the brains of man and 
the higher apes, 8 
Vultures, selection of a mate by the 
female, 634 ; colours of, 752 


W 

Waders, young of, 741 

Wagner, R., on the occurrence of 
the diastema in a Kafiir skull, 
60 ; on the bronchi of the black 
stork, 672 

Wagtail, Ray’s, arrival of the male 
before the female, 327 

Wa^ails, Indian, young of, 716 

Waist, proportions of, in soldiers 
and sailors, 48 

Waitz, Prof., on the number of spe- 
cies of man, 270 ; on the lia- 
bility of negroes to tropical fevers 
after residence in a cold climate, 
300 ; on the colour of Australian 
infants, 849 ; on the beardless- 
ness of negroes, 852 ; on the 
fondness of mankind for orna- 
ments, 874 ; on negro ideas of 
female beauty, 882 ; on Javan 
and Cochin Chinese ideas of 
beauty, 883 

Waldeyer, M., on the hermaphro- 
ditism of the vertebrate embiwo, 
249 

Wales, North, numerical propor- 
tion of male and female births in, 
374 

Walkenaer and Gervais, spider at- 
tracted by music, 420 ; on the 
Myriapoda, 421 

Walker, Alex., on the large size of 
the hands of labourers’ children, 
49 

, F., on sexual differences in 

the diptera, 430 

Wallace, Dr. A., on the prehensile 
use of the tarsi in male moths, 
323 ; on the rearing of the Allan- 
thus silkmoth, 387 ; on breed- 
ing Lepidoptera, 387 ; proportion 


WALLACE. 


INDEX. 


WARBLERS. 


1027 


of sexes of Bomhyx cyrUhia, B. 
yamamaiy and By Pernyi reared 
389 ; on the development of 
• Bombyx cynthia and B. yamamai, 
427 ; on the pairing of Bomhyx 
cynthia^ 487 

Wallace, A. R., on the ori^n of 
man, 4 ; on the power of imita- 
tion in man, 103 ; on the use of 
missiles by the orang, 124 ; on 
the varying appreciation of truth 
among different tribes, 187 ; on 
the limits of natural selection in 
man, 49, 195 ; on the occurrence 
of remorse among savages, 202 ; 
on the effects of natural selection 
on civilised nations, 205 ; on the 
use of the convergence of the hair 
at the elbow in the orang, 233 ; 
on the contrast in the characters 
of the Malays and Papuans, 260; 
on the line of separation between 
the Papuans and Malays, 262 ; on 
the birds of paradise, 338 ; on the 
sexes of Ornithoptera Croesus, 
386 ; on protective resemblances, 
402 ; on the relative sizes of the 
sexes of insects, 427 ; on Elap- 
homyia, 430 ; on the pugnacity 
of the males of Leptorhyrichus 
angustatus, 459 ; on sounds pro- 
duced by Euchirus longimanus, 
465 ; on the colours of Diadema, 
473 ; on Kallima, 477 ; on the 
protective colouring of moths, 
480 ; on bright coloration as pro- 
tective in butterflies, 481 ; on 
variability in the Papilionidae, 
490 ; on male and female butter- 
flies, inhabiting different stations, 
492 , on the protective nature 
of the dull colouring of female 
butterflies, 492, 493, 496 ; on 
mimicry in butterflies, 497 ; on 
the bright colours of caterpillars, 
499 ; on brightly-coloured fishes 
frequenting reefs, 525 ; on the 
coral snakes, 540 ; on Paradisea 
apoda, 587 ; on the display of 
plumage by male birds of paradise, 
603 ; on assemblies of birds of 
paradise, 618 ; on the instability 
of the ocellated spots in Hip- 


parchia Janira, 653 ; on sexually 
limited inheritance, 677 ; on the 
sexual coloration of birds, 689, 
721, 722, 725, 732; on the re- 
lation between the colours and 
nidification of birds, 689, 694; on 
the colloration of the Cotingidse, 
701 ; on the females of Para- 
disea apoda and papuana, 717 ; 
on the incubation of the casso- 
wary, 729 ; on protective colora- 
tion in birds, 745 ; on tlie 
Babirusa, 792 ; on the markings 
of the tiger, 832 ; on the beards 
of the Papuans, 853 ; on the 
hair of the Papuans, 875 ; on the 
distribution of hair on the human 
body, 916 

Walrus, development of the nicti- 
tating membrane in the, 24 ; 
tusks of the, 766, 774 ; use of the 
tusks by the, 784 

Walsh, B. D. on the proportion of 
the sexes in Papilio Turnus, 
386 ; on the Cynipidse and Ceci- 
domyid®, 390; on the jaws of 
Ammophila, 423 ; on Corydalis 
cornutus, 423 ; on the prehensile 
organs of male insects, 423 ; on 
the antennse of Penthe, 425 ; on 
the caudal appendages of dragon- 
flies, 425 ; on Platyphyllum con- 
cavum, 439 ; on the sexes of the 
Ephemeridse, 444 ; on the differ- 
ence of colour in the sexes of 
Spectrum femoratum, 444 ; on 
sexes of dragon-flies, 445 ; on the 
difference of the sexes in the 
Ichneumonidse, 448 ; on the sexes 
of Orsodacna atra, 452 ; on the 
variation of the horns of the male 
Phanieas carnifex, 455 ; on the 
coloration of the species of 
Anthocharis, 479 

Wapiti, battles of, 764 ; traces of 
horns in the female, 769 ; at- 
tacking a man, 780 ; crest of 
the male, 810 ; sexual differ- 
ence in the colour of the, 818 

Warbler, hedge-, 722 ; young of 
the, 735 

Warblers, superb, nidification of, 
692 


1028 


WARINESS. 


INDEX. 


WESTRINO. 


Wariness, acquired by animals, 122 
Warington, R,, on the habits of the 
stickleback, 509, 528 ; on the 
brilliant colours of the male 
stickleback during the breeding 
season, 521 

Wart-hog, tusks and pads of the 
793 

Watchmakers, short-sighted, 49 
Waterhen, 552 

Waterhouse, C. 0., on blind beetles, 
451 ; on diiference of colour in 
the sexes of beetles, 452 

, G. R., on the voice of Hylo- 

hates agilis, 864 

Water-ouzel, 694 ; autumn song of 
the, 566 

Waterton, C., on the Bell-bird, 
592 ; on the pairing of a Canada 
goose with a Bernicle gander, 
632 ; on hares fighting, 763 
Wattles, disadvantageous to male 
birds in fighting, 614 
Weale, J., Mansel, on a South Afri- 
can caterpillar, 499 
Wealth, influence of, 207 
Weapons, used by man, 72 ; em- 
ployed by monkeys, 124 ; offen- 
sive, of males, 324 ; of mammals, 
764 et seq. 

Weaver-bird, 566 

Weaver- birds, rattling of the wings 
of, 574 ; assemblies of, 618 
Webb, Dr., on the wisdom teeth, 
28 

Wedderburn, Mr., assembly of 
black game, 620 

Wedgwood, Hensleigh, onthe origin 
of language, 132 

Weevils, sexual difference in length 
of snout in some, 321 
Weir, Harrison, on the numerical 
proportion of the sexes in pigs 
and rabbits, 381 ; on the sexes 
of young pigeons, 382 ; on the 
songs of birds, 564 ; on pigeons, 
626 ; on the dislike of blue 
pigeons to other coloured varie- 
ties, 636 ; on the desertion of 
their mates by female pigeons, 
638 

Weir, J. Jenner, on the nightingale 
and blackcap, 327 ; on the rela- 


tive sexual maturity of male 
birds, 328 ; on female pigeons 
deserting a feeble mate, 330 ; 
on three starlings frequenting the 
same nest, 338 ; on the propor- 
tion of the sexes in Mac^tes 
pugnax and other birds, 382, 
383 ; on the coloration of the 
Triphcence, 480 ; on the rejection 
of certain caterpillars by birds, 
500 ; on sexual differences of 
the beak in the goldfinch, 551 ; 
on a piping bullfinch, 564 ; on 
the object of the nightingale’s 
song, 564 ; on song-birds, 565 ; 
on the pugnacity of male fine- 
plumaged birds, 609 ; on the 
courtship of birds, 610 ; on the 
finding of new mates by Pere- 
grine falcons and Kestrels, 622 ; 
on the bullfinch and starling, 
622 ; on the cause of birds re- 
maining unpaired, 624 ; on 
starlings and parrots living in 
triplets, 624 ; on recognition 
of colour by birds, 628 ; on 
hybrid birds, 632 ; on the 
selection of a greenfinch by a 
female canary, 633 ; on a case 
of rivalry of female bullfinches, 
640 ; on the maturity of the 
golden pheasant, 738 

Weisbach, Dr., measurement of men 
of different races, 250 ; on the 
greater variability of men than 
of women, 344 ; on the relative 
proportions of the body in the 
sexes of different races of man, 
851 

Weismann, Prof., colours ofAycowuc, 
478 

Welcker, M., on brachycephaly and 
dolichocephaly, 84 ; on sexual 
differences in the skull in man, 
847 

Wells, Dr,, on the immunity of co- 
loured races from certain poisons, 
300 

Westring, on the stridulation of 
males of Theridion, 420 ; on the 
stridulation of ReduviiLS per- 
sonatus, 432 ; on the stridulation 
of beetles, 463 ; on the stridula- 


WESTROPP. 


INDEX. 


WOLVES. 


1029 


tion of Omaloplia hruniua^ 465 ; 
on the stridulating organs of the 
Coleoptera, 466 ; on sounds pro- 
duced by CychruSy 466 
Westropp, H. M., on reason in a 
bear, 116 ; on the prevalence of 
certain forms of ornamentation, 
277 

Westwood, J. 0., on the classifica- 
tion of the Hymenoptera, 228 ; 
on the Culicidfe and Tabanidae, 
321 ; on a Hymenopterous para- 
site with a sedentary male, 342 ; 
on the proportions of the sexes in 
Lucanus cervus and Siagoniurriy 
390 ; on the absence of ocelli in 
female Mutillidse, 422 ; on the 
jaws of Ammophila, 423 ; on the 
copulation of insects of distinct 
species, 423 ; on the male of 
Crahro crihrariusy 424 ; on the 
pugnacity of male Tipulce, 431 ; 
on the stridulation of Pirates 
stridulusy 432 ; on the Cicadae, 
433 ; on the stridulating organs 
of the cricket, 436 ; on Ephippiger 
vitium, 437 ; on Pnevmwray 440 ; 
on the pugnacity of the Mantides, 
443 ; on PlcdyhlemnuSy 444 ; on 
difference in the sexes of the 
Agrionidae, 445 ; on the pugna- 
city of the males of a species 
of Tenthredinae, 447 ; on the 
pugnacity of the male stag- 
beetle, 459 ; on Bledius taurus 
and Siagoniurriy 458 ; on lamel- 
licorn beetles, 462 ; on the 
coloration of Lithosiay 481 
Whale, Sperm-, battles of male, 
764, 787 

Whales, nakedness of, 85 
Whately, Arch., language not 
peculiar to man, 129 ; on the 
primitive civilisation of man, 221 
Whewell, Prof., on maternal affec- 
tion, 106 

Whiskers, in monkeys, 232 
White, F. B,, noise produced by 
Hylophila, 471 

, Gilbert, on the proportion of 

the sexes in the partridge, 382 ; 
on the house-cricket, 435; on. the 
object of the song of birds, 564 ; 


on the finding of new mates by 
white owls, 622 ; on spring coveys 
of male partridges, 622, 623 
Whiteness, a sexual ornament in 
some birds, 754 ; of mammals 
inhabiting snowy countries, 827 
White-throat, amal love-dance of 
the male, 581 

Whitney, Prof., on the development 
of language, 131 ; language not 
indispensable for thought, 135 
Widgeon, pairing with a pintail 
duck, 632 

Widow - bird, polygamous, 338 ; 
breeding plumage of the male, 
598, 613 ; female, rejecting the 
unadorned male, 639 
Widows and widowers, mortality 
of, 215 

Wilckens, Dr., on the modification 
of domestic animals in mountain- 
ous regions, 52 ; on a numerical 
relation between the hairs and 
excretory pores in sheep, 306 
Wilder, Dr. Burt, on the greater 
frequency of supernumerary digits 
in men than in women, 345 
Williams, on the marriage-customs 
of the Fijians, 914 
Wilson, Dr., on the conical heads 
of the natives of North-Western 
Africa, 888 ; on the Fijians, 888 ; 
on the persistence of the fashion 
of compressing the skull, 889 
Wing-spurs, 558, 685 
Wings, differences of, in the two 
sexes of butterflies and Hymenop- 
tera, 426 ; play of, in the court- 
ship of birds, 610 

Winter, change of colour of mam- 
mals in, 827 
Witchcraft, 146 

Wives, traces of the forcible capture 
of, 222 

Wolf, winter change of the, 828 
Wolff, on the variability of the vis- 
cera in man, 40 

Wollaston, T. V., on EurygnathuSy 
425 ; on musical Curculionidse, 
462 ; on the stridulation of 
AcalleSy 468 

Wolves, learning to bark from 
dogs, 110 ; hunting in packs, 154 


1030 


EVOLVES. 


INDEX. 


YELLOW. 


"Wolves, black, 824 
Wombat, black varieties of the, 
823 

Women, distinguished from men by 
male monkeys, 11 ; preponder- 
ance of, in numbers, 377 ; selec- 
tion of, for beauty, 911 ; effects 
of selection of, in accordance with 
different standards of beauty, 
890 ; practice of capturing, 
899, 903 ; early betrothals and 
slavery of, 905 ; • freedom of 
selection by, in savage tribes, 
912 

Wonder, manifestations of, by ani- 
mals, 108 

Wonfor, Mr., on sexual peculiarities, 
in the wings of butterflies, 426 
Wood, J., on muscular variations 
in man, 39, 61, 63 ; on the 
greater variability of the muscles 
in men than in women, 344 

, T. W., on the colouring of the 

orange-tip butterfly, 479 ; on 
the habits of the Saturniidae, 
483 ; quarrels of chamaeleons, 
547 ; on the habits of Menura 
Alberti, 568 ; on Tetrao cupido, 
568 ; on the display of plumage 
by male pheasants, 603, 607 ; 
on the ocellated spots of the 
Argus pheasant, 671 ; on fight- 
ing of Menura superha, 619 ; 
on the habits of the female casso- 
wary, 729 

Woodcock, coloration of the, 748 
Woodpecker, selection of a mate by 
the female, 634 

Woodpeckers, 568 ; tapping of, 
574 ; colours and nidification of 
the, 694, 698, 709 ; characters 
of young, 746, 724, 734, 735 
Woolner, Mr., observations on the 
ear in man, 21 

Wormald, Mr., on the coloration of 
Hypopyra, 483 
Wounds, healing of, 10 
Wren, 722 ; young of the, 735 
Wright, C. A., on the young of 
Orocetes and Petrocincla, 743 

, Chauncey, great brain-power 

requisite for language, 72 ; on 
correlative acquisition. 869 ; 


on the enlargement of the brain 
in man, 932 

Wright, Mr., on the. Scotch deer- 
hound, 789 ; on sexual preference 
in dogs, 800 ; on the rejection of 
a horse by a mare, 801 

, W. von, on the protective 

plumage of the Ptarmigan, 595 
Writing, 222 

Wyman, Prof., on the prolongation 
of the coccyx in the human 
embryo, 13 ; on the condition 
of the great toe in the human 
embryo, 15 ; on the occurrence 
of the supra-condyloid foramen 
in the humerus of man, 31 ; on 
variation in the skulls of the 
natives of the Sandwich Islands, 
39 ; on the hatching of the 
eggs in the mouths and branchial 
cavities of male fishes, 251, 529 

X 

Xenarchus, on the Cicadse, 433 
Xenophon, selection in mankind 
advocated by, 43 

Xenorhynchus, sexual difference in 
the colour of the eyes in, 649 
Xiphophorus Hellerii, peculiar anal 
fin of the male, 517 
Xylocopa, difference of the sexes in, 
449 

Y 

Yarrell, W., on the habits of the 
Cyprinidse, 385 ; on Raia clavaia, 
508 ; on the characters of the 
male salmon during the breeding 
season, 510, 521 ; on the char- 
acters of the rays, 513 ; on the 
gemmeous dragonet, 515 ; on 
colours of salmon, 521 ; on the 
spawning of the salmon, 527 ; 
on the incubation of the Lopho- 
branchii, 530 ; on rivalry in 
song-birds, 565 ; on the trachea 
of the swan, 572 ; on the moult- 
ing of the Anatidae, 599 ; on the 
young of the waders, 741 
Yellow fever, immunity of negroes 
and mulattoes from, 300 


TOUATT. 


INDEX. 


ZYG-«NIDiB. 


1031 


Youatt, Mr., on the development of 
the horns in cattle, 363 
Yura-caras, their notions of beauty, 
883 

Z 

Zebra, rejection of an ass by a 
female, 825 ; stripes of the, 832 
Zebus, humps of, 813 
Zigzags, prevalence of, as orna- 
ments, 277 


Zincke, Mr., on European emigra- 
tion to America, 218 
Zootoca vivipara, sexual difference 
in the coloijr of, 547 
Zouteveen, Dr., polydactylism, 55; 
proportion of sexes at Cape of 
Good Hope, 375; spiders attracted 
by music, 421 ; on sounds pro- 
duced by fish, 582 
Zygaenidae, coloration of the, 481 


THE END 



rHWT%D AT TH* EDINBURGH FBESS, 9 AND II YOUNG STREET 









