








m^jjt 




PUBLICATIONS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER 



CLASSICAL SERIES 
No. Ill 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

BOOKS I-VI 



Published by the University of Manchester at 

THE UNIVERSITY PRESS (H. M. McKechnie, M.A., Secretary) 

12 Lime Giioye, Oxford Road, MANCHESTER 

LONGMANS, GREEN & CO. 

London : 39 Paternoster Row 

New YoiiK : 443-449 Fourth Avenue and Thirtieth Street 

■ Bombay : 8 Hornby Road 

Calcutta : 303 Bowbazar Street 

JiIadeas : 167 Mount Road ^ 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 



THE TEXT EDITED WITH INTHODUCTION, 
NOTES, ETC. 

BY 

E. B. ENGLAND, Litt.D. 

LATE WARDEN OF HULME HALL AXD ASSISTANT LECTURER IN CLASSICS 
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER 



VOL. I 
BOOKS I-VI 



MANCHESTER 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PEESS 

12 LIME GROVE, OXFORD ROAD 

LONGMANS, GREEN & CO. 

LONDON, NEW YORK, BOMBAY, ETC 
1921 



THE INSTITUTE OF J^EDIAEVAL STUDIES 
10 ELMSLEY PLACE 
TORONTO 5, CAMAOAi / 






PUBLICATIONS OF THE UNIA'ERSITY OF MANCHESTER 

No. CXLIII 



PEEFACE 

Only two commentaries on the whole of Plato's Laivs have 
hitherto been published, that of Fr. Ast, Leipzig, Weid- 
mann, 1814; and that of G. Stall baum, Leipzig, Hennings, 
1859 and 1860. Many critical editions of the text, how- 
ever, have appeared, of which I will only mention those 
which I have used in writing my notes. These are the 
editions of Rutger Kessen, Louvain, 1531 ; H. Stephanus, 
1578; L Bekker, Berlin, 1817; C. E. Ch. Schneider, Paris, 
Didot, 1877; C. Fr. Hermann, Leipzig, Teubner, 1852; 
F. AV. Wagner, Leipzig, Engelmann, 1854, 1855; J. G. 
Baiter, J. C. Orelli, A. W. Winckelmann, Ziirich, 1839; 
M. Schanz, Leipzig, Tauchnitz, 1879 (the first six books 
only); J. Burnet, Oxford, Clarendon Prebs, 1906. To all 
these my debt has been great, but I have derived more help 
from Professor Burnet's edition, with its critical notes and 
its revised and repunctuated text, than from any of the texts 
or commentaries, while he and the Clarendon Press have 
laid me under a further great obligation by allowing me to 
use the Oxford edition as the basis of my own revision. 

Students of the Laivs have derived valuable assistance 
from the many translations which have been made, whether 
into Latin, or into a modern language. Of such I have 
constantly consulted those of Marsilio Ficino, Venice, 1491 
(twenty-two years before the appearance of the first printed 
Greek text) ; C. E. Ch. Schneider, F. W. Wagner, and 
B. Jowett, 2nd ed., Oxford, 1875. 

Every page of my notes reveals indebtedness to scholars 
who have dealt with the text or interpretation of separate 
passages. The two works of C. Ritter (Platos Gesetze, (1) 
Darstellung des Inhalts, and (2) Kommentar zum griechischen 
Texte, Leipzig, Teubner, 1896) deserve special mention. 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

They approach, from the large number of passages treated, 
to a regular commentary. Plafon by Dr. von Wilamowitz- 
Mollendorf did not come into my hands till this book was 
in type. Vol. IL contains about fifty emendations in 
the text of the Laws. A few of these may be generally 
accepted, and all merit careful consideration. 

To Professor Burnet, and to my own teacher. Professor 
Henry Jackson, O.M., I am indebted for much readily given 
help on passages of special difficulty. The late Professor 
J. B. Mayor of King's College, London, was good enough 
to read through and comment on my notes on the first half 
of Book V. 

Two more names I mention with a grateful recognition of 
invaluable assistance, that of the late Mr. F. H. Dale, C.B., 
and that of Mrs. James Adam. The former, without whose 
constant encouragement my work could hardly have been 
done, read through and discussed with me my notes on nearly 
the whole of the first ten books. Mrs. Adam has laid me 
under a great obligation by reading through all the proof- 
sheets. She has set me right many times, but she is not 
responsible for all that remains after her criticisms have been 
adopted. Notes in brackets with the initials F.H.D., 
A.M.A., J.B.M. record the chief instances where these 
scholars have differed from without convincing me. 

Li the text square brackets denote the rejection of 
enclosed words or letters ; angular brackets that the 
enclosed words or letters have been added conjecturally to 
the MS. text. Clarendon type has been used to denote all 
other alterations which have been made in modern times — at 
any time, that is, since the invention of printing. 

References to any other part of Plato are to the pages 
and divisions of Stephanus's edition, and where the number of 
the line is added, it is that of Burnet's text, 

E. B. E. 

High Wray, April 1921. 



"M 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Introduction ......... i 

Analyses of Books I-YI ..... .9 

Text of Books I-YI . 33 

Notes . . . . . . .195 



Vll 

6 
3 74 

,a ? I .11 



ADDENDA ET COEEIGENDA 

p. 14 line 14 from bottom, for to read in 

NOTES 

624 a 4 line 6. for Platos read Platons 
630 a 5 line 4. for TrvcrTOTrjs read ttkxtottjs 
630 c 8 line 3. for cDs read ws 

634 c 5 line 10. for by a magistrate or by an old man read 

by an old man to a magistrate or 

635 e 4 line 4. for Xe7a; /x^u read X^yoj/jLcv 

637 d 4 line 11. for fiedevetp read ixedvuv 

638 b 2 line 6. for 456 read 356 

639 a 7 line 8. for pres. read pres. ind. 
639 c 1 line 8. for eop. read icjp. 

643 c 5 line 4. for TratSta read vaidia, 

643 7 line 1. for Tratdiwv read iraidiQu 

643 c 7 line 2. for -jraideiwv read TraiSetcDi' 

647 a 5 line 3. for vaidiai read iraidiai 

647 e 2 line 3. for ohs read oIop 

p. 279 line 5. for y read y 

660 d 8 line 2. for applied read suppliedj 

665 e 2-7 line 9. for alxfJ-f^Talcn read aix^oLTaicrt 

66G d 9 line 4. add — MSS. tt^v, Aid. ^v, Schmidt rrjv i}v. 

666 e 2 line 6. for ^ovd read /3oua 

667 a 1 line 7. for dioKoi read dLoiKoi 

667 b 5-c 3 line 22. for eyKaTaTer/xTj/xevov read ^yKaTareTfnjfiivov 

667 e 3 line 1. for iiraKoKovdrj read i-rraKoXovdrj 

668 a 1 line 8. for cfris 7^ead et ris 

669 e 6 line 12. for 648 e read 648 c 
671 a 6 line 7. for afer read after 

680 e 6 line 5. for If . . . proleptically. read But op. below 
683 a 5 and 7. 
ix 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

683 b 1 line 8. for re read tl 

683 e 5 line 33. for -fJKLara read TJKiaTa 

684 b 5 line 5. dele of 

687 e 2 line 5, for befel read befell 

688 b 6 line 5. /or Trpec^evTLKr) read irpea^vTLKy] 
688 d 2 line 3. for Sia/cwXeiycret rearf 5ta/cwXi;cret 

688 d 2 line 7. /or 6'^ej' 5?; rgaci? bdevbit] 

689 d 5 line 11. for Trpoaxpv/^^fV f<^«^ irpocrxP^fJ^^^V 
691 a 1 line 2. for e 7 reat^ c 7 

693 b 2 line 1. for v{iv8r] read vvvb-q 
695 b 2 line 1. /or absolue read absolute 

698 b 5 line 10. /or practical read poetical 

699 d 8 line 1. for tI read tl 

708 a 3 line 7. for fxaXiaT' read fidXiaT 

709 c 1 line 16. for ix-q read •^ jx-q 
710,'a 1 line 7. for use read use it 

712 e 7 line 4. /or duaxvpi^o/xevou read duax^pi-^o/xevos 
717 a 8 line 9. insert ) a/i5gr "predicate " 
719 d 6 line 2. /or " timeless " (aor. ) read (*' timeless " aor. ) 
730 c 3 line 4. for dboirj read eldeirj 

730 d 7 line 3. for dvayopeveado} read dvayopeveadu) 

731 (1 6 line 7. for proud read fond 

732 d 6 line 2. for dvdoa read avdpa 

739 c 1 line 9. for suggsetion read suggestion 

739 d 5 line 7. dele — 

739 d 5 line 18 insert ) after considered 

745 a 6 line 6. for aicrxpoKepdeia read aiaxpOKepdeia ■ 

752 d 6 line 4. for sterotyped read stereotyped 

754 d 8 line 5. for £20 read £16 

756 c 6 line 4. for e 16 read 1. 16 

756 e 4f. line 15. for e 19 f. read 1. 19f. 

758 a 8 line 3. for a 6 read d 6 

760 e 7 line 15. for inaedifieare read inaedificare 

763 c 3 line 13. for darvvv/xicv read aarwoixuiv 

766 b 3 line 5 /or it read tCov 

773 e 4 line 4. for " stands per read stands " per_ 

774 c 3 tf. line 24. for pecunia read penuria 

775 b 3 line 3. for gen. read ace. 



■ INTRODUCTION 

The treasury of pregnant truths which Plato in extreme old 
age left, under the title of Laws, as his last legacy to 
humanity falls into two distinct parts. 

When the three pedestrians of the dialogue had reached 
the place of noonday rest on their midsummer day's walk 
from Cnossos to the Cave of Zeus, the Athenian calls upon 
the others to observe that, while they had been talking 
about laws half the day, they had not yet made, for their 
new colony, a single law. If, on this hint, the reader of 
Plato's treatise will turn to see what proportion it contains 
of actual legislation, and what of " talk about laws," he will 
find that the " talk " bears to the " laws " the relation of two 
to one. Of the 321 of Stephanus's pages occupied by the 
Laws not more than 107 contain definite statutes with their 
penalties.^ 

To describe this supplement to the actual legislation 
Plato uses the term Trpoolixtov, pleased, as usual, to find a 
linguistic analogy in established usage. Besides meaning 
custom, convention or latv, vo/>(,os was used for a musical 
" piece " or " theme." Every substantial piece had its 
prelude : what better name then could be found for the 
prefaces to the whole treatise on vo/xot or to particular laws 

than VOfJUDV TTpOOLfXta ? 

Of one of these two kinds all the supplementary matter 
consists. Either it is an elucidatory introduction to the 

^ In this latter total are reckoned the necessary directions in Bk. VII. 
for the nurture of the very young and the education of the adolescent, 
though the author, while declaring, at 790 b 2, that they are the founda- 
tion of all legislation, expressly disclaims for them the name of laws. 

VOL. I 1 B 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

subject as a whole, or it is such an introduction to one 
important law or to a section of the code. 

The former, or general, introduction, which is resumed at 
times in later books, comprises what is at first sight a 
perplexing variety of subjects. The perplexity becomes less 
when we find a key to it in the perception that, with Plato, 
Politics is a branch of the life-long ^ process of Education. 

The subject under consideration is Man in Society — 
avOpdiTToi TToAtTeuo/xevoi.^ About Man it is clear ^ "that every 
living creature has a smaller, and inferior, vovs when it is 
born than it has when it is full-grown. About Society 
likewise * we conclude that, in its early stages, many 
possibilities for both good and evil are still unrealized. 
The education of the former is to be in the hands of nurses 
and schoolmasters, under the direction of the most distinguished 
of all state officials : ^ that of the latter mainly in those of the 
lawgiver alone. 

The possibilities of development (1) of Human Nature, 
and (2) of Society, and the agencies by which satisfactory 
developments may be produced, are therefore the main 
subjects of the lawgiver's consideration. Roughly speaking, 
the latter part of Bk. L, Bk. IL, the first part of Bk. V. and 
many individual preludes — including the majority of those 
in Bk. VIL — cover the ground of (1). The early part of 
Bk. I., many of the Trpooifxia, Bks. HL and IV. cover that 
of (2). 

Among the preludes to special classes of laws the long 
theological argument in Bk. X. occupies an outstanding 
position. Though technically the prelude to laws against 
impiety, and dangerous superstitions, Cleinias at 887 b 8 
speaks of it as fit to rank as " im-ep aTrdvriav tQ>v vofxiDv kolWl- 
(TTov T€ KoX apLOTTov TrpooL/jLLov." Tfils clalm iudlcates the 
supreme importance attached by the lawgiver to religion as 
a sanction and preservative of law. 

Another prelude which stands out from among the rest 
is the dissertation in the eighth book (825-841), on the 
unhealthy and the healthy indulgence of sexual appetite. 

i807d4. 2 676 b 3. 3 672 b 8. 

* 678 b 1-3. 5 765 d 8. 

2 



INTRODUCTION 

This is not a preface to a law, for no law is made. The 
community is not ripe for it. The author's dissertation is 
merely a Aoyos . . . v6/xos kTriyjetpdv ylyvecrdai ^ — an argument 
which does its best to impose itself on men's consciences. 
He speaks " before a corrupt tribunal " as the " single-handed 
opponent of overwhelming desire, with reason for his only 
help and support." ^ The only satisfactory law would be one 
forbidding all indulgence of the kind except that between 
lawful husband and wife, with a view to child-production ^ — 
the pair to be faithful to each other for life — as Plato 
beautifully expresses it,* efifxevovres ^€f3auos rai? Trpwrats 
T7]<s <f>LXias ofxoXoyiacs. The nearest approach to this which 
he contemplates as possible at the time is the arousing of 
tht sense of shame whenever this high standard should be 
publicly transgressed. 

The most influential of the agencies with which the 
educator and the lawgiver alike can work are pleasure and 
pain,^ honour and dishonour.^ "We are told ^ that education 
consists in being brought to like and to dislike the right 
things, and so to secure that rjSovat and Xvirai, rt/xai and 
aTL/jLLaL are no longer at variance with dper-j and to SiKaLov. 
At 697 b 2 ff., 716 d 4 ff., and in the first eight pages of Bk. V. 
stress is laid on the importance of right regard for various 
advantages and characteristics, and the hope of attaining to 
an honourable rank in the community is at many points held 
out as an inducement to patriotic and virtuous conduct.^ 

In this connexion two remarkable institutions claim 
special attention: (1) the Aiovvcrov TrpecrfBvTojv x^/^os, "Old 
Men's Dionysiac Chorus," of Bk. II. (665 a 8 fF.) ; and (2) the 
Nocturnal Council described in Bk. XII. (951 and 961 flf.). 
Both institutions are to be powerful conservatives of that dpcTrj 
which is the indispensable condition of the cvSatfiovLa of 
either state or individual. The second of these two institu- 
tions is elaborately devised as the best possible a-o>T7//ota 
TroXiT€Las Kal vo/acoi/.^ The former is the receptacle of the 

i835e5. 2 835 c 5. » 839 a 1, 840 d, 841 d. 

4 840 d 8. 5 636d5ff. « 643 c 8 ff. and 653 a 5 ff. 

'689 a. 8 e.g. 697 a 10. ^ 960 d Iff. 

3 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

highest educational wisdom, and constitutes the standard of 
" Musical " taste for the community — and so acts as a 
(TO)Tr]pLa TTJs 6pOrj<s TratSetas,^ a iraiSeias cfivXaKrj.^ Enjoyment, 
whether spontaneous and individual, or organized and 
gregarious, may have a good or a bad effect — it may increase 
or decrease the dperri of both performers and audience. It 
is a task for the keenest artistic insight, combined with an 
enlightened and patriotic love of virtue, to guide and to 
regulate all kinds of artistic representation. The legislator's 
duty in this matter is explained and enforced in the long 
dissertation in Bk. IL on the connexion between Art and 
Morality. The xo/>os Aiovvcrov does for Art what the 
Nocturnal Assembly of Bk. XII. is to do for Religion and 
Philosophy. 

In the endeavour to estimate our author's drift we are not 
left altogether to ourselves. Plato gives us his own view of 
the significance of his treatise on Laws in two aspects : (1) 
as to its relation to his Eepuhlic ; (2) as to the apprecia- 
tion he hoped to secure for it. 

(1) On p. 739 he distinctly explains that he renounces, as 
a practical ideal, the complete communism of the earlier 
political treatise. The main ideal is, however, to remain in 
theory, and among " second-best " practicable regulations the 
legislator must choose those which come nearest to that 
ideal. ^ 

(2) At 811 c 6 ff. Plato naively declares that the Laws is 
the sort of book which it would do everybody good to study, 
and further, that agreement or disagreement with its teaching 
is to be a test to which all literature must submit. The same 

i653al. 2 654 d 8. 

' On one point — that of sexual relations — the author of the Laws 
seems to have abandoned his former advocacy of communism. In the 
passage above referred to in Bk. VIIL wliere Plato reaches the high- 
water-mark of monogamous morality, tliere is no indication of a 
theoretically superior state of things. Here, too, there is a "first-best," 
and a "second-best," but the first-best is the cordial recognition, in its 
regulation by the state and society, of the monogamous ideal ; the 
second-best is the partial acknowledgement of its superiority by a society 
which is ashamed to disown it, but shrinks from adopting it as 
imperative and official. 

4 



INTRODUCTION 

appreciation of all publications on the subject of Law is ^ 
expressed at 858 e 5 tf., where Plato claims that such writings 
ought to be considered as literature^ and ought to be written 
in a persuasive and kindly style. Again, at 957 c 4 ff., " the 
study of Law is of all others the surest to make the learner 
a better man." 

More than this : Law itself must be an object of an 
almost instinctive reverence. While to be consistently and 
continuously law-abiding is to be one of the surest roads to 
rank and distinction,^ a still higher civic excellence is that of 
the man who feels bound, whenever occasion offers, to take 
upon himself the duty of a modern policeman. " The man 
who interferes to prevent wrongdoing ^ is worthy of twice 
the honour of the merely law-abiding citizen." ..." The 
man who helps the magistrate to punish offenders is the perfect 
citizen, the paragon of virtue." Oftenj after ordaining the 
penalty for an offence, he points to the duty of the by- 
stander to help to bring an offender to justice — ordaining at 
least the penalty of social disgrace if this duty be not 
fulfilled. To a modern Englishman this demand seems 
significant of oppressive interference, by an almost personified 
state, with individual liberty. Nor is this the only regula- 
tion which he might resent on the same ground. Many 
restrictions are placed on the citizen's freedom by the 
legislator of the Laws. For instance : (1) the family Kkrjpos 
must never be sold or divided,^ nor (2) must other property 
be acquired by its owner than land, its stock and equipment, 
and its produce,'* and even this kind of property was limited 
in amount by law.^ (3) Testators are much restricted in 
disposing of their property after death.^ (4) Parents are 
compelled to send their children to school.^ 

On the other hand the liberty of the individual citizen is, 
in important aspects, recognized by Plato as a state necessity 
as well. "Do not," he says, "make your magistrates big 
and irresponsible : the statesman must cherish freedom, as 

i729d4ff. 2 730 d 2. 3 741b. 

4 741el, c7ff., 846d. « 744 e. 6 922bff. 

' 804 d. His comment on this regulation is "Don't forget, parents, 
that your children belong to the state more than they do to you." 

5 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

well as wisdom and fellow-feeling. "^ But this freedom cannot, 
as things are, be complete. A spontaneous, enlightened 
social instinct ought to bring every man voluntarily to 
undergo these and other necessary state restrictions.^ He 
should realize that it is to his own advantage as much as — 
even more than — to that of the state, if the common good 
comes first in everybody's thoughts, and his own private 
interest second : " to fxkv yap kolvov ctvvSgl, to Be lSlov Siacnra 
Ttts TToAets."^ Such, however, is human nature that, though 
a man may see this, the allurement of pleasure and the 
dread of pain prove stronger than wisdom. Only a divinely 
inspired man, if such were to arise,"* could act aright without 
the constraining bonds of man-made ra^ts and vojxos. These 
fetters are no disgrace to Wisdom, but only to the blind- 
ness of men. Wisdom's supreme authority is sacred and 
universal. Positive, compulsory Law and Order have only a 
delegated power, and would be unnecessary if men were 
perfect.^ 

Much thought and discussion, along with much experience 
of life, may enable men to grasp the idea of a service " which 
is perfect freedom " — may even open their minds to the 
vision of a Divine Law — of a wisdom whose sphere altogether 
transcends their own capabilities of insight. Three or four 
passages in the Laws — ^which at first sight seem merely 
pessimistic — are probably meant as helps to a humble 
attitude towards the supreme Nous. Three times ^ he calls 
men " God's puppets." He even says that their so being is 
the best thing about them.^ Great natural and historical 
catastrophes, he says, impress on him the littleness of all that 
human forethought and endeavour can achieve.^ Again, 
"after all, men's aff'airs are not much worth being in earnest 
about, but we cannot help being in earnest all the same — 
more's the pity ! " To such views, he tells us, he is brought 
when he contemplates the stupendous nature of the divine 
excellence.^ " Bear with me, Megillus ! My words of 
depreciation were due to a sudden revelation of our insignifi- 

1693 b 2. 2 875. 3 375 a 6. 

^875c3fr. 5 875 c 6 ff. ^ 644d 7 ff., 803 c 4 flf., 804 b 3. 

' 803 c 5. 8 709 a. ^ 804 b. 



INTRODUCTION 

cance in the face of God. Perhaps there is some good in 
mankind, perhaps he deserves our care, after all." ^ 

Such lofty themes as these stand side by side, in the 
treatise, with humble pictures of every - day life. As 
0. Apelt says, in an admirable short apergu prefixed to a 
critical study of some passages in the Laws (Jena Progr. 
1906), "Based, as the work largely is, on the various 
experiences of daily life, and so bringing, as it does, the 
' divine ' Plato down to our human level, the very informality 
of its construction and style heightens this sense of familiarity. 
Its natural abandon touches us more nearly than the perfec- 
tion of art. The one thing on which the author's heart is 
set is safely to house a rich harvest,^ and he does not trouble 
himself much to sift and arrange his matter by art and rule. 
Not that he gives his thoughts a dull and trivial form — he 
would not be Plato if he did that — but the tone is often 
louder, and the expression more far-fetched, or more poetical 
than usual. The balance and finish of the Republic's style 
are wanting. The sentence construction is particularly loose. 
The talk pours forth as it does in actual conversation ; the 
rush of thought gives it at each turn a fresh form ; but the 
thought gets expressed all the same." 

We are richly the gainers by this pouring out of the aged 
philosopher's stores of meditation on daily life. Many an 
unforgettable piece of practical wisdom we may glean from 
the pages of the Laws. For example : *' There is a most 
deadly evil at home in most men's hearts. Nobody takes 
himself to task for it : nobody tries to get rid of it — it is 

^ More truly pessimistic is the mysterious and isolated speculation 
contained in 896 d 5-897 d 1. Here he feels constrained, by his doctrine 
of \l^vxv, to recognize, at all events in the lowly sphere of human mind 
and character, and in man's immediate physical surroundings, a rival to 
the supreme yovs. No motive is assigned to this so-called ^pvxv. The 
language in which its activity is described is altogether of a negative 
character. It is a mere personification of unwisdom and misrule. It is 
as if Plato said "it must be there, but I do not understand it, and can 
say nothing more about it." The whole Kbajxot is manifestly under the 
sway of the dpiarTj xpvxf] and all that proceeds /xaviKUfS re Kal drd/crajs 
does but serve to make its brilliancy more visible. 

^ At 752 a 8 we get a hint of Plato's sense that the time left him is 
short, and his powers limited : "^crrai ravT," he says, "dv debs idiXrj Kal 
Yf}p^^ iiri.KpaTQiJ.ev t6 ye toctovtov" 

7 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

self-love^ and the belief that it is right to be one's own best 
friend : whereas in fact all kinds of mischief flow from this 
source. Here, as elsewhere, the lover is blind, and cannot 
distinguish right from wrong or good from bad : more 
respect, he thinks, is due to himself, than to the truth." ^ 

"A good way to get on good terms with friends and 
comrades is to think their services to you greater than they 
do themselves, and to hold your services to them of less 
importance than your friends think them." ^ 

" There is nothing deadly about complete ignorance of 
a subject : it is much worse when much has been learnt in a 
bad way." ^ 

"A slave should be safer from wrong than a free man : 
it is a sham goodness which only avoids wrongdoing when it 
is difficult." 4 

"It is a disgrace for a mistress to be called in the 
morning by her maids : she ought to call them." '^ 

" No man is fit to rule who has not first been under rule him- 
self ; moreover, to have served well is a better title to distinc- 
tion than to have been a good ruler. For among a man's rulers 
are the Gods, as well as his elders and betters among men." ^ 

" Hatcrtv Se alSo) )(^prj ttoXXtJv, ov ^(^pva-ov KaraXLTre.iv? The 
best way to give this to children — and to yourself at the 
same time— is, not to admonish them so much as we do, but 
to let them see that we never fail to do what such admoni- 
tion would direct." ^ 

" What you do not see, in your little corner of the mighty 
universe, is, that things do not happen in it for your sake : 
you, like all that takes place there, are what you are in 
order that its perfection may be complete." ^ 

To conclude this rough sketch of the contents of Plato's 
Laws, we may ask what is the abiding impression left by its 
perusal. Is it not this ? Not only has he given us a code of 
political and social law which has been the foundation of 
much subsequent legislation, but he leaves us with increased 
reverence for the rule of right and goodness, and a quickened 
faith in its ultimate victory over folly, superstition, and vice. 

i731d6. 2 729 c 8 ff. ^ gig a 3. 

^ 777 d 2. 5 808 a 3. , « 762 e Iff. 

'729bl. 8 729 c 2. 9 903 b 4. 

8 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK I 

624 a 1. Spartan and Cretan institutions, which claim to have 
been the work of divinely inspired legislators, are based on the 
assumption that the state is a fighting machine. If it cannot 
fight, it loses its independence, and the power of enjoying its 
property. 

626 c 5. But there are other fights besides (I) those with foreign 
states. (2) A country may be at variance with itself. (3) A 
man's "better self" has to contend with his baser inclinations 
(and for a right termination of the third kind of fight the noblest 
qualities of all are required). 

626 e 5. In fights (2) and (3) the victory of ihe better elements 
is spoken of as a victory of the whole being. 

627 C 2. In civil strife the important thing is to reconcile the 
combatants, not to exterminate, or reduce to impotence, the van- 
quished side. 

628 C 4. This opens up a wider friew for the vofj-oOer-qs. Of 
course he aims, in his legislation, at producing the greatest excellence, 
and therefore he must not organize his state solely with a view to 
external war, for this develops only an inferior kind of excellence. 
Instead of thinking of war when there is peace, he ought rather 
to be thinking of peace when he is conducting war. 

629 a 4. Success in civil strife demands higher qualities than 
success in foreign warfare, inasmuch as, to succeed in the former, 
a man must win the trust of his fellow citizens. This cannot be 
done without more virtues than that of bodily courage. He must 
have all the virtues. 

630 b 8. Therefore, in framing laws, big or small, the vofiod^T-qs 
must have in view the production of excellence of all kinds, and, 
in estimating different kinds of excellence, he must put the mind 
before the body, and, of the virtues of the mind, he must esteem 
those most highly which have least to do with the body, and most 

9 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

with the mind. Herein we have the key to the proper classifica- 
tion of laws. 

632 d 8. As all life is a fight, and as, in all fights, the excellence 
of the fighter depends prominently on his Kapreprjcns (power of 
resistance), it may be expected that in other virtnes there will be 
an element like that which is prominent in bodily courage. A 
legislation which tries only to encourage the power of resistance 
to bodily pain and danger, is a lame, left-handed kind of legislation. 
There are all the temptations of pleasure to be resisted, and these 
are ignored by such legislation. 

635 ® 4- ^^ other words, if the Spartan and Cretan institutions 
are to stand examination, they must be able to show that they 
develop tempera7ice, which comes next above courage, in order of 
precedence, of the virtues of the character. 

An exclusively military life stimulates excessive pugnacity, and 
a too exclusive devotion to bodily development has, incidentally, 
brought unnatural vice in its train. The two questions (1) 
"what pleasures ought not to be sought?" and (2) "what pains 
ought not to be avoided ?" go to the foundations of the philosophy 
of Law. 

636 e 4. It is urged that, if the discipline of the military state 
is rigid, it makes for virtue by putting down excess — such excess, for 
instance, as any degree of intoxication — with a strong hand. 

637 ^ 7. This contention opens up the consideration of the 
proper way of ensuring virtue. Ought the ultimate controlling 
power to he external or internal? Even where a foreigner would 
think there was the extremity of licence, there may be safeguards 
to morality in the Kaprkpr^cns — the power of saying no — possessed 
by the individual. 

637 d 3. Take the question of wine-drinking ; ^ Is it absolutely 
wrong that any man should, on any occasion, take enough wine to 
intoxicate him — as we say, " to get into his head " ? ^ Are we not 

^ Here follows an apparent digression, for the length of which the author 
apologizes beforehand. The ensuing discussion of fied-q (1) throws fresh and 
original light on the nature and process of education, the moral effects of 
pleasure and pain, and the testing and formation of character ; and (2) intro- 
duces us to a kind of mechanism by which, in dealing with /xovaiKr), the 
vofjLodiTr]^ can guide this process in the right direction. This second division 
forms the main subject of Bk. II. Incidentally, the demonstration of the 
similarity of the suggested process of education in temperance to the process 
of education in courage, emphasizes the closeness of connexion between the 
two virtues. 

2 In the Republic, p. 403, we are told that the (pvXaKcs are never to get 
into this state. 

10 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK I 

in danger of associating fxeOr^ in our minds with attendant evils 
which may conceivably be dissociated from it ? It may perhaps 
be admitted that, in human experience, these evils always have, so 
far, accompanied ixkdrj. 

640 a 4. Every assembly of men who meet with a common 
purpose must have a leader. The leader of an army must be hrave : 
the leader of a drinking-party must be soher. 

641 a 3. "But even if it he well-conducted, what good will it 
do ? Can it produce anything to stand side by side with the 
victory which an army aims at winning ? " The answer is, not 
only do the victories it ensures leave no unhappy memories, such 
as are left by the victories of armies, but — astonishing as it may seem 
— it is a valuable means of education. 

643 a 2. Education in general is the training of the young for 
the activities of life, but, as used by the wise lawgiver, the word 
means the formation of a virtuous character. In this sense TraiSeia 
is TrpiOTov Twv KaA-Ato-Tcov in good men's eyes. 

644 b 6. A wise calculation (Aoytcr/xos), on the part of the 
state, of the advantage, or disadvantage, to be secured by any course 
of action — i.e. a balancing of prospective pleasure and pain — results 
in, or rather embodies itself in, law. This law must be such as 
will come to the aid of a man's better self, when pulled this way 
and that by the attractions of pleasure, and the fear of pain. 
Thus law becomes a sort of conscience to the state, which dictates 
external and internal policy, and throws light on the nature of 
€7nTr)8€VfiaTa — such as drinking-bouts — and on the aims to be 
pursued by the process of education. 

645 d 1. Much wine heightens the sense of pleasure and pain, 
heightens anger and desire, while it confuses and deadens the 
intellect and the judgement. You ask : " Who would willingly put 
himself into a state in which his moral character is, for the time, 
made worse?" In return I ask: "Does not every one, when he 
incurs great bodily fatigue, or takes a strong drug, knowingly put 
his body, for a time, into a worse state ? " 

646 d 8. You ask again : " What good can fxWt] do, which will 
stand comparison with the muscular efficiency produced by hard 
bodily exercise, and the cure wrought by the drug ? " Well : 
there are two kinds of fear. One, the fear of pain ; the other, 
the fear of disgrace. This last we call shame ; and while we fight 
the former, we encourage the latter. At Sparta you fight the 
former kind by making the young undergo dangers and hardships ; 
ie. they are artificially put in positions similar to those which, in 

11 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

real life, will call for the exercise of the virtue of courage. These 
artificially contrived exercises not only train ; they enable the 
educators to form an opinion of the strength and worth of individ- 
ual characters. A similar power of endurance is demanded when 
temptations to pleasure have to be faced. What better occasion 
can be imagined for practising the young in the right sort of fear 
or for discerning which of them are temperate, than a symposium 
presided over and watched by sober seniors ? The young are 
there brought by wine into a state in which they are specially 
susceptible to temptations. They are thus at once trained to 
endurance, and their characters can then best be judged by their 
educators. 

If a cf)dp/jLaKov existed whicli would temporarily stimulate fear 
in the same way that wine stimulates the tendency to vfSpcs and 
self-indulgence of all kinds, it would be a valuable agent, and 
would save much trouble in the training in dvSpc ta. Why then 
should we discard the use of pleasant wine as a training in 
(r(i)(f)po(rvvrj 1 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK II 

652. The right use of wine may do more than test character ; 
it may be a preservative of the effects of Education. What 
is real Education ? Long before the judgement is mature, the 
habits may be formed of liking and disliking the right things, and 
it is just in the formation of such habits that real education consists. 
But the feelings of pleasure and pain thus fostered tend to lose 
their strength in the workaday world. The gods have arranged 
holidays to keep these feelings alive, and have sent us the Muses, 
Apollo and Dionysus, to teach us how to celebrate these festal days. 

What Apollo and the Muses do for us is to add, to the child's 
innate delight in flinging itself about and making noises, the 
delight in the systematizing of these noises and motions — in other 
words, they inspire us with the sense of and love of pvOfxos and 
a ppo via. 

For choice performances are not only for the festivals of adults ; 
they are also for the education of the young. 

This is the main way in which that training of the likes and 
dislikes by habit is secured. It is not only, remember, the skill of 

12 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK II 

the young xopevr-q's that must be kept in view by the educator, 
it is his taste as well. There is a moral and an . immoral xopeta, 
and the child must be habituated to like the moral sort. 

What is moral /jLovcriK-q and \opeta 1 We can only say that 
IxoviTLKri (is a langauge, and) interprets the mind ; and if 
the mind and intention is good, the fMOvcriK-q will be good. 
E.g, anyone can tell from mien and tone whether a man is a 
coward or not ; so it is that songs and dances may be made to 
reveal all the virtues and vices. But /xova-LKrj is a language which 
it needs a trained eye and ear to read. Everybody's judgement is 
not to be taken on the question what is the best fiovariK-q ? Here 
again we come to the importance of good habituation : not only 
will a taste for bad julovo-lk-j, if indulged, make a man himself bad, 
but nothing but habituation to the good can ensure a genuine 
pronouncement on the side of what is right and good.^ 

Poets, who compose the materials of yopeta^ must be under 
constraint and guidance. The wise Egyptians have for ever 
stereotyped their art, and allow no deviation from fixed forms. 
What has been done once can be done again. Let our legislators 
look to it then, and make arrangements for the proper supervision 
of poets and musicians. 

657 C- To return to the question of what is the right plover iK-tj. 
Delight is the spring of motion in the young and active, and the 
more mature and aged, whose activity is flagging, feel a reflected 
delight in watching and superintending the performances of the 
young. The popular notion that the best p^ovaiKii] is that which 
gives most pleasure is right in a sense. But it is these mature 
and aged people whose judgement must settle the question of what 
is pleasantest — i.e. best. A child may take more delight in a 
puppet-show than in a tragedy, so we must correct the bald state- 
ment that the best povatK-q is that which gives most pleasure, by 
adding " to the best judges,'^ and these, as we maintain, are the old 
and experienced ; it may even happen that there is one man who 
is the best judge of all, and, if so, he should decide. The matter 
ought never to be settled by the noisy crowd in the theatre, as it 
is in Italy and Sicily — and with disastrous results to the poets, 
who are made worse by their audience, instead of making their 
audience better, as they should. 

Again, then, we are brought to see that education draws the 

* It would seem to follow from this that the Jirst educators must have 
been inspired by the gods, and the education and training of the young by 
habit was the means of passing tliis inspiration on to other generations, 

n 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

young in the direction that wise experience finds out to be the 
right one, and that the drawing consists in the right formation 
of the sentiments of pleasure and pain. To secure this end 
the lawgiver must call in the aid of the poet — acting under the 
lawgiver's direction. 

660 e. The main duty laid on the poet will be that of con- 
vincing the young that no physical or worldly advantage, even 
when coupled with the lowest of the virtues — bravery — are of 
any good to a man — are even had for him — if he has not the 
higher virtues as well. I would make it a crime for a poet, or any- 
one else, to talk as if there were any real gain for a man apart 
from goodness, or any pleasure in doing wrong. 

663 a. You tell the young stories full of impossibilities, and 
they believe them. Use this childish belief : even if I had not 
proved that virtue means happiness, you can see the necessity 
of making the child believe it. The chanting which fills the ear 
and moves the tongue of the child must enchant him to believe 
that heaven has ordained that real pleasure lies in goodness, 
and is inseparable from it. 

664 c. For this same chanting let three kinds of chorus be 
constituted : (1) the Muses' chorus of children ; (2) Apollo's chorus 
of the youthful ; and (3) the mature, from thirty onwards to sixty, 
must serve the Music of the state in diverse ways. Some of these 
— the oldest, no doubt — must tell myths to the young, while the 
younger men perhaps will actually sing ; but the main use of the 
mature will be to form a standard of taste, and regulate the Music 
of the whole state. And this chorus, as being the repository of 
real wisdom, is the most valuable to the state of all the three. 

664 e. Now, inasmuch as to the mature all kinds of activity 
are no longer promoted by the imperative instinct which will not 
let the young keep quiet, — and which we saw to be the soil out 
of which all the Muses' art was develojjed, — the gift of Dionysus 
comes in to supply an artificial stimulus to activity and to supple- 
ness of mind and body. Hence the chorus of the mature is to be 
called the Chorus of Dionysus. 

666. The very " fire " which wine puts into the mature and 
elderly — and which is beneficent in the way described above — is 
superfluous, and may even be dangerous, if applied to the already 
" fiery " young. 

666 e. The " old men's chorus," then, must mean something 
quite different to what it does in Sparta ; nor must the education 
of the young be what it is there — i.e. the manufacture of soldiers, 

14 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK II 

The chanting of this "chorus" must be, not the Music of the 
theatre and the dancing-ground but, the enchanting pi the young, 
to make them love virtue. 

667 b 5. What then is r) KaXXta-Ti] w5rj ? Is it merely that 
which gives most pleasure ? In all pleasant things — in all gifts 
of heaven — there is something else besides pleasure. About them 
all we ask, not only (1) are they pleasant ? but (2), does the intellect 
pronounce them to be correct ? and (3) does the moral judgement 
pronounce them to be good ? 

In the realm of art, where we deal with representations or 
imitations., the pleasure which these representations give proclaims 
them the gift of heaven (xapts:). But it is the intellect^ not the 
feeling of pleasure or pain, which answers the question : " Is 
it like ? " Therefore, even if there is no question of the good or 
harm it does, pleasure can no longer be the only criterion of a work 
of art. 

668 b. But, if it is to be more than a toy, or harmless amuse- 
ment, the artistic representation must manage to represent some- 
thing morally beneficial. 

668 c. The true and competent judge, then, must have (1) a 
knowledge of the thing to be represented, (2) the power of 
comparing or measuring the e.g. picture by or with the thing 
represented ; and (3) the judgement to pronounce on its moral 
character and effect. 

669 b 5. Music needs greater skill in the critic than do the 
other arts. Music represents states of mind and character ; not 
only do these need more experience for their recognition, but 
the evil they can do is more intimate, and reaches further. And 
our poets and musicians are no Muses ; anyone can see by their 
senseless vagaries that they are capable of doing m.uch harm. 

670 a 6. So you see there is good reason in saying that the 
chorus of the mature must know more about IMusic than the other 
two choii-s. They must have the trained faculties that the other 
choirs have, but they must add, secondly, the technical knowledge 
necessary for the poet and musician, and, thirdly, they must know 
what sort of Music does them good, and will make the young love 
virtue. 

671 a 4. Now let us consider wine as a help towards securing 
this object. Wine, we agreed, makes the mature, for the time, 
more plastic and susceptible to external influences, but it also 
makes a man over-confident — even shameless, sometimes. There- 
ife>re an ^issembly of mature drinkers will need a ruler of the feast, 

15 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

no less than does the symposium of the young. These rulers 
would naturally be men over sixty, — to see the rules kept, and to 
keep the peace. 

672 a 4. So far, then, from the " madness " caused by wine being 
an evil, inflicted by a malignant power, as some say, the " fire " it 
puts into the blood has the same effect on us, when we are grown 
up, as the exuberant spirits and activity of childhood have on 
children. In both cases this liveliness is the soil out of which 
Music grows. 

672 e. You two Dorians would, I know, like nothing better than 
a full discussion of the gymnastic training necessary for the bodily 
half of Music — i.e. dancing — which springs from the same soil as the 
other half; and you would discuss the subject admirably. But 
first let us finish off the topic of wine-drinking, by pointing out 
that the adoption of this mechanism by the state for educational 
purposes involves strict limitation by law of the production and use 
of wine. No city that adopts these regulations will need to have 
many vineyards. 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK III 

676. What is the nature of political organization ? Since 
the world began there must have been countless civilizations 
which have arisen and been wiped out, with all their arts and 
devices, by natural cataclysms. After each cataclysm only a few 
scattered, uncivilized men must have been left on the mountain 
tops, and these would have to begin their civilization and the 
formation of communities all over again. To learn the nature and 
ground-work of political organizations the best way will be to 
follow, in imagination, the steps by which such scattered remains 
of unsophisticated humanity would coalesce and grow into a 
political community. 

678 C. On overcoming the horror of the plains, caused by the 
recent catastrophe, these men would be driven, in the course 
of many generations, by social instinct to congregate ; their wits 
would be sharpened by intercourse, and the arts would gradually 
revive — and among them the art of acquiring property, the 
art of lying, and the art of war. 

679 e 6. In the course of this sketch we may be able to see 

16 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK III 

where and how laics come into being. The first form of com- 
munity would be like what Homer described that of the 
Cyclopes to be, i.e. a family in which the father's will was the 
only law. 

680 d 7. This family would naturally grow, in after generations, 
into a clan^ of which the representative of the father of the original 
family would be the chieftain ; it would have its own rough 
notions of what to do and w^hat to avoid, and its own character. 
One clan might be braver, or more orderly, than another. 

681 C 1.. The next step is taken when separate clans — each 
wedded to its own customs, and each with its own character — 
coalesce to form a community. There would then have to be 
some compromise and common understanding as to what, of all 
the various customs, it would be good for the united community to 
adopt. Here we have the beginning of the 'positive enactment of laws. 

681 d 7. Whereas the first community would settle probably 
on the lower slopes of the hills, the third stage would be reached 
when — all memory of the dangers of the plain having vanished — 
men ventured, in course of time, to build a city on an elevation in 
a plain. In this same age men would begin to traverse the sea, 
and city would begin to war with city. This brings us to the 
time of the Trojan war, and the beginning of history. 

682 d 5. We next come to the foundation of the Dorian Con- 
federacy of Sparta, Argos, and Messene ; we return, that is, to an 
examination of the same Dorian institutions with which Book I. 
began. 

683 C 8. How was it that that confederacy, in spite of all the 
advantages which its founders had, and of the formidable aspect 
which it presented to foreign powers, was yet a failure ? 

686 c 7. When we talk of the success or failure of a nation, 
we must not think exclusively of its ability to force its will on 
other nations, or of its lack of this power. The question is not, 
" is a state, or a man, strong ? " but " is it (or he) wise enough 
to make a proper use of its strength ? " That is what tests its 
laws and its lawgivers. The worst unwisdom (folly) is that of 
the state, or man, when conscience points one way, and desire 
another. That state of folly means ruin to a community, and to 
an individual : and there is no mental disability in a man which 
is such a complete disqualification for any political ofiice as this 
want of harmony between the desires and the judgement. 

689 e 4. There are seven titles to power over one's fellows : 
there is 

VOL. I 17 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(1) The right of parents over children and descendants ; 

(2) The right of those who are royally horn to govern those who 
are not ; 

(3) The right of the older to rule the younger ; 

(4) The right of masters to rule their slaves ; 

(5) The right of the stronger to rule the weaker ; 

(6) The right of the wise to rule the less wise ; 

(7) The right which is decided by the fall of the lot. 

With all these claims in the field, conflicts between claimants are 
inevitable. 

690 d 5, It is an overweening sense of their own importance, 
and a desire to get too much out of their position, that 
generally brings ruin on kings. What saved Sparta, when Argos 
and Messene sank, was that the kingly power was halved by 
the fortunate birth of twins in the royal house, and was further 
restricted by the recognition, on the part of its legislators, of some 
of the other claims to power, besides that of hirth — and the 
appointment of co-existing authorities. 

692 d 1. So great was the defection of Argos and Messene, 
whose monarchs were left with an unrestricted power, that, as far 
as the interests of Hellas went, they largely nullified the good 
which Sparta was able to do. 

693 a 5, A wise lawgiver then will recognize many fountains of 
authority in a state, and will see that only in this way can he 
secure the three main civic requisites, i.e. freedom, statesmanship, 
and unity (or public spirit.) 

693 d 2. If these three objects are to be secured, the government 
must be neither an extreme autocracy, nor an extreme democracy, 
but must be a judicious mixture of the two. 

694 a 3. Persia's history shows us how all its misfortunes came 
with the withdrawal of all restrictions from the kingly power. 

698 a 9. In the days of Athens's glory a respect for law tempered 
the desire of every man to do as he liked ; but this desire got 
the better of law in time — showing itself first in the realm of 
Art, where the untrained and uneducated many asserted their right 
to judge as against the educated and judicious few. 

702 a 2. " How," asks the Athenian, "can we test the truth 
of all these principles at which, in our discussion, we have 
arrived ? " Cleinias answers that there is a practical way open to 
them, in which they can embody and perhaps test their political 
principles ; for he has himself been entrusted — with a few other 
citizens — with the task of framing laws for a new colony. 

18 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK IV 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK IV 



704. A city should not be a seaport, but should be at least 
ten miles inland from a harbour, on soil which produces many 
kinds of crops, but none in such abundance as to leave a 
surplus for exportation. Foreign trade is demoralizing ; so is a 
navy : it takes the steadfastness out of a land-army to know they 
can get out of harm's way by taking to their ships ; besides, sea- 
fighting gives no scope for merit, and no chance of winning honour. 
It was Marathon and Plataea which, respectively, began and 
completed the discomfiture of the barbarians, and the salvation of 
Hellas. If it was the navy which saved her, it would have been 
better for her to perish than so to be saved. Wrong living is 
worse than death. 

7076* If the colonists of the new city come, like a swarm of 
bees, all from the same home, they will pull together the better 
for it, but then prejudice against any improvement in constitution 
or legislation will be invincible. It will be better to undertake 
the difficult task of welding a heterogeneous populace into one. 
No man who is not equal to a great and difficult task is fit to be 
a lawgiver or the founder of a city. 

709 a. For all his cleverness, however, the lawgiver may find 
choMce too strong for him. Still, that is no reason for pronouncing 
skill worthless. If skill is helpless against bad luck, good luck is 
useless without skill. 

709 d. Given a heaven-sent lawgiver then, what must a city like 
our colony ask of luck ? This : that absolute power and influence 
over the whole body should be with one virtuous, wide-minded 
man, who can rule himself as well as the state, and who will take 
the lawgiver into his confidence and follow his advice. For our 
purposes it will be best, I say, for the power to be in one man's 
hands, always supposing that he possesses the above-mentioned 
virtues and qualifications. The difficulty of endowing a city 
with a perfect polity will be greater, the more the supreme 
power is, in the first case, limited, or subdivided. It is true that 
it is asking a great deal of Chance, to postulate such a conjunction 
of virtue and liberality of mind in a ruling power of any kind. 
But it is the only way to get a perfect polity, and it is an easy one. 

712. If you have faith enough to take this from me, you will 
perhaps listen to me when I tell you what the best polity is, and 
what are the best laws. 

19 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

After soliciting divine help let us proceed to consider the form 
of polity to be chosen. 

713. The ordinary titles given by political philosophers — those 
ending in -cracy — all denote that one particular part of the 
community is supreme over the others ; this is never the case in 
a real polity. 

In the Golden Age Cronos appointed Sat/xoves — superior 
beings — to rule over mankind ; this analogy will explain what I 
think the right course at the present day. There is in man a 
divine part — his mind — and this divine element must do as Cronos 
did, and appoint subordinate ministers for our government. These 
ministers of mind's ordaining are the ordinances which we 
call Laws. These must be sovereign over the state, and over 
every member of it. But as we have seen that no real polity 
exists where one element of the populace is supreme over the 
others, so no laws have any binding force, which are made in the 
interest of any separate element in the state. To be binding they 
/"/must be made in the best interest of the state as a whole; and 
obedience to these laws is the crowning virtue of the statesman and 
the administrator, — the main title to honour and office. 

No state can thrive unless the rulers are the slaves of the 
Law. 

I would begin by charging the citizens to remember that God's 
rule is inevitable and all-pervading, and that righteousness and 
vengeance against unrighteousness are his constant attendants. 
Therefore wickedness is folly, and though the wicked man may 
prosper for a time, his prosperity will only make his ruin the more 
disastrous both to himself and to society. 

716 C. How then is man to please God ? 

In all God's works "Measure" is discernible. Like, as the 
proverb says, clings to like, and man's wisdom is to live by 
measure. To break bounds, to be lawless, is impiety, and even the 
offerings and the prayers of an impious man are hateful 
to God. For the pious, however, it is the first of duties to 
pay worship and honour to all Gods, both the higher and the 
lower ; next after them to the memory of " divine " men, and 
next to one's parents. To our parents and to their care we owe 
our being : nothing that we can do for them can overpay them, 
and remember that the time when we can repay is the time of 
their greatest need— when the payment is most valuable. The 
greatest care must be taken never, by word or deed, to show 
disrespect to parents. When they are angry with us, we must 

20 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK IV 

not resent it. When they die, we must pay due honour to their 
ashes. 

718. So much for our duties to our superiors. We must go to 
the laws to learn how our life is to be adorned by duties done to 
our family, to our fellow-citizens, or even to strangers. 

Before each class or chapter of laws it will be well to set a 
preface, to explain the principle of the enactments, to recommend 
their adoption, and generally to bring the subjects of the laws into 
such a state of mind as will be favourable to their acceptance. 

719. As it is, the way of evil is easy, and the j'ath of virtue ?; 
hard : the voice of the law is precise and prosaic ; all the more need 
for some adornment of the subject. Such a preface may be com- 
pared with the confidential talk which a skilful physician will 
hold with an enlightened patient, before prescribing his medicine 
and treatment. 

720. As a sample, take the bare law as to marriage — which 
may well be among the first things to be regulated — and add a 
disquisition on the principles on which it is founded, and the 
desirability of the objects it seeks to attain. 

722.' Even Megillus, with all his Spartan love of brevity, 
prefers a law with such a preface to one without. And the 
Athenian assures him that the excess of benefit is far beyond the 
excess in length. Further, the Athenian compares such a preamble 
to the prelude with which a skilful musician brings his audience 
into accord with his main theme, and hints incidentally that 
great skill, comparable to that of the musician, will be necessary 
for its composition ; for the " themes " of difl^'erent classes of laws 
differ widely, and all laws, with some trifling exceptions, need to 
be accompanied by such a preamble. 

Fortified with this instrument, we will make a second start. 
As to religion and religious duties, what has been already said 
may suffice. Next follow duties affecting (1) our own souls, (2) our 
bodies, and (3) our property. 



21 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK V 

726. Honour the soul next to Heaven ! There are in 
practice many wrong methods of honouring the soul which must 
be avoided — such as self-opinionatedness, and self-indulgence. 

728 d 2. As to our duties to the Body, and Property, we must 
remember that a middle state is best in both. — Duties there are also 
to one's family, relatives, friends, the state, and foreigners. 

730 b 1. Of desirable personal qualities Tritf/i stands highest ; 
next comes Justice — and personal efforts to see right done and 
wrong punished ; honourable too are Temperance and Wisdom — 
provided these virtues are of a social character, and tend to spread 
to others and help others. Even Anger is necessary, in its place — 
but Mercy too. 

731 d 6. The most general, ugly, and disastrous blemish in 
human character is selfishness. It clouds the judgement, and is 
fruitful in folly and error. 

732 d 8. Such conduct as has been recommended is not only 
right in itself, and so pleasing to Heaven ; it is best and pleasantest 
for man. 

733 d 7. This may be seen from the consideration of various 
kinds of lives — that of the temperate, the intellectual, the brave, or 
the healthy as contrasted with that of the intemperate, the simpleton, 
the coward, or the diseased, respectively. The balance of happiness 
will throughout be found on the side of the former, though the 
latter may have moments of acuter enjoyment. 

734 ® ^- ^^^ political framework of a state consists of (a) the 
Magistrates, who are of a superior nature to the ordinary citizen ; 
and (6) the Laws, which the magistrates have to administer. 

735 a 7. Applicants for citizenship in our colony must be 
tested, and the unsatisfactory applicants rejected — summarily, or 
on some specious pretext. 

736 C 5. As it is a new foundation, all citizens can start fair, 
unhampered by debts, and the overshadowing influence of great 
estates which mar the peace of an old-established state. But peace 
will not reign long here unless the pride of possession can be 
mitigated, and the love of gain for itself eradicated. 

737 C 1. Supposing for the sake of argument that the size 
of the territory, the nature of the soil, and the size of the 
neighbouring state will admit, we will imagine a community of 

22 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK V 

5040 householders. The number lends itself readily to many- 
kinds of sub -division. 

738 b 2. Advantage must be taken of any religious association 
the land enjoys, and of all possible leligious sentiment on the part 
of the members of the community — such, e.g., as respect for 
Oracles. Each local division must have a patron deity, whose 
shrine and T^/xevos will form the centre of tribal life, and social 
intercourse among the tribesmen. 

739. This is a practical treatise : it will try to find ways 
out of all kinds of difficulties, and where perfection is impossible, 
it will advise a course which may be only second, or even third 
best. But it holds that the philosophic lawgiver's first duty is to 
hold up before his hearers an ideal 'perfection, so that we may 
make comparison with it a test for every proposal. The nearer 
it comes to the ideal state of things, the better it is. 

739 e 8. Our first deviation from the ideal will be in the 
matter of property. In an ideal state all will be in common, but 
our citizens are to be allowed to possess land and houses. They 
must always remember, however, that the land is part of the 
state, and owned by the state as well as by themselves ; and also 
that it is sacred, as being a part of the divine Mother Earth : hence 
let their holding be sacred to them, an inviolable unit. It must 
be a main object of high statesmanship so to regulate the size 
of families that each generation shall be roughly of the same size 
as the preceding one. 

741 a 6. I would charge the citizens to respect the equal 
distribution of property, and the numerical arrangements connected 
with it. It must be a sacred duty with them to preserve their 
holding intact, and to shrink from adding to their property by 
trade ; for this would upset the numerical distribution. Trade 
in general is debasing to the character, and should be discouraged. 

741 e 6. No citizen shall be allowed to possess gold or silver 
money. The baser, small, currency which will be allowed, will be 
in use chiefly among artificers and slaves. If a citizen has to go 
abroad on public or private business, he will be furnished with 
money for his journey by the state. 

742 c 2. Dowries are to be forbidden ; and so is credit and usury. 
742 d 1. The wise lawgiver and politician will not look first to 

the greatness and wealth of his country, but to its virtue and happiness. 
It is impossible for the very rich to be very good. To be the 
former a man must have no scruples about gaining, and no 
impulses towards spending more than is absolutely necessary. 

23 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

743 ^ ^' '^^^ absence of money, and money-making, and credit, 
will remove many obstacles to peace and good-feeling — there will 
be far fewer lawsuits — and men will have time to spare for the 
real interests of their (1) souls and (2) bodies. Property must take 
its place as of only thi/rd-rate importance. This order must be 
recognized by the state in all honours it confers ; and the law- 
giver must test his laws by asking if they recognize this order of 
precedence. 

744 a 8. Still, property must count for something in the state. 
Our new citizens will (unfortunately) not all bring equal properties 
with them when they come. Those who have much will be able 
to add to their store — and this will be permitted within certain 
limits. — And so we will have B^ur Glasses in the state, arranged 
on a property qualification. The state must see to it that there is 
no abject poverty, and that there are no millionaires. It must be a 
crime to divide the KXrjpos, and a crime to hold more than four 
times its original amount of land. Any property gained beyond 
that must go to the state, and the gods. There shall be a Public 
Register of all surplus property — of all, i.e., beyond the original 
KXrjpos, which any citizens hold. 

745 b 3. The city must stand on the middle of its territory, 
with a central "acropolis sacred to Hestia, Zeus and Athena." 
From this shall radiate lines dividing (1) the city and (2) the 
country into twelve parts — not necessarily equal in size, but equal 
in productive power. 

745 e 2. Each KXrjpo<s shall consist of two parts, one near 
the city, and one at a distance, and there shall be a dwelling-house 
on both. 

745 ® '^' ^^^ ^^^ ^^^^ ^ ^^y again that the lawgiver must have an 
ideal, and, in practice, you must come as near it as you can. 

746 d 3. Let mathematics preside over all tribal and other 
divisions, as well as over all measures and weights in daily use, and 
let them all be arranged so as to fit in with and be readily 
interchanged with each other. 

There is no mental discipline so efficacious as mathematics, 
if it be kept liberal, as a science, and not debased for purposes 
of trade. We do not want our citizens to be Egyptians or 
Phoenicians. (It may not be their fault, poor fellows : there is 
something magical in climate and situation, as all politicians ought 
to know.) 



24. 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK VI 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK VI 



751. We have now to choose fit persons as magistrates, and 
assign to them administrative duties. It is imperative that they 
should be capable . Not only must candidates for office have a 
good record, but the electorate must be trained in the constitution 
and its ways. 

752. In the case of a newly formed state, with new laws, and 
a heterogeneous population, such education is impossible. In the 
first election of officials, then, the parent state must intervene. 
To begin with, they must help the colonists to select from among 
themselves and the parent state a body of 37 vo/>io<^vAaKcs. 
This body is to be permanent, and future elections to it, in days 
when the state has taken shape, must be conducted in the following 
manner. Voters to be all who bear arms, or have seen service, 
whether in cavalry or infantry ; election — in the most sacred 
temple — to proceed by three stages ; at the first stage 300, at the 
second 100, at the final 37 are to be elected. For the first 
election, however, and for all arrangements as to elections and 
qualifications of all magistrates, a committee of 200 — half colonists 
and half Cnossians — is to have full powers. 

754 d 4. The body of vo/xoffivXaKe^ must (1) exercise general 
supervision over the laws of the state, and (2) must keep the 
register of each man's property ; and (3) if it be proved to them 
that any man possesses more than a trifie above the legal amount, 
they are to ordain the confiscation of all but the original KX.rjpos. A 
vofxocfivka^ must be over 50 and under 70. In addition to the three 
duties named above they will have many others which we shall 
have occasion to mention in connexion with the laws concerned. 

Now as to the other magistrates. 

755^ 6. The three a-TparrjyoL are to be elected, by all who are 
serving, or have served as soldiers, from a preliminary list 
nominated by the vofMO(f>vXaK€S, but subject to the criticism of a 
popular vote. They must then pass the SoKLfxacria. The Hipparchs 
are to be elected in the same manner, only the actual voters 
(according to 756 b 1) are to be the cavalry. The Taxiarchs and 
Phylarchs are to be nominated by their superior officers and 
elected by the hoplites and cavalry respectively. The officers 
of the light-armed auxiliaries are to be appointed by the generals. 
The first elections are to be presided over by the vo/xo</)vA.aKes ; 
subsequent ones by the TrpvTaveLs — of whom more hereafter — and 

25 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the presiding magistrates must decide between candidates who on 
successive occasions have obtained equal votes. 

756 b 7. Next as to the fSovX-q. 

Three hundred and sixty /SovXevTat are to be elected — 90 by 
each of the four property-classes. All members of the community 
may vote. On the first four days _ candidates are nominated — an 
unlimited number — from each of the four classes respectively ; 
on the fifth day 180 of each class are to be selected by all voters 
from among the nominees, and 90 out of each 180 selected by lot. 
These, when they have passed the SoKLfxaa-ta, are to serve as 
l^ovXevTai for the year. On the third day of nomination the fourth 
class are not compelled to nominate, and on the fourth day the third 
and fourth classes are not compelled to nominate. At all other 
stages, nomination and voting are compulsory. 

757. In this form of election, while the introduction of the 
lot prevents the richer classes from having absolute power, the pre- 
ponderance of power given to these classes is for the good of the 
community. True equality consists, not in giving equal power to 
every man, but in giving power in proportion to worth. This can 
really be done by God alone, but it is our duty to attempt it, and 
not to acquiesce either in the absolute power of one or a few — i.e. 
in oligarchy or tyranny — or on the other hand in the absolute 
equality of all — i.e. democracy. We must never lose sight of the 
difference between the worth of different individuals, though of 
that true equality — which consists of inequality — we can, in our 
human communities, only get a passable imitation. This is one 
reason why we must submit to have our judgement " watered " by 
the lot ; another reason is that the lot may be guided by a higher 
and wiser power. At the same time the lot must not be our master. 

758. That there may always be some officials on the look-out 
for dangers — whether external or internal — to the state : that 
there may be representatives of the state ready to deal with foreign 
states, and to preside over state assemblies, a twelfth part of the 
/Sovk-j must, in monthly rotation, form a standing committee 
called TrpvTaveLS. 

758 e. For local surveillance both in country and in town the 
twelvefold divisions (cp. above, 745 b 6 ff.) will form convenient 
administrative areas. Besides providing for the charge of religious 
edifices and the land annexed to them, we must institute three 
kinds of local magistrates : (1) acrrvvd/xoc for the supervision of 
the city, (2) dyopavoixoL for that of the market-place and trade, 
(3) dypovofxoL for the defence and policing of the country districts. 

26 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK VI 

As to the religious officials, families already enjoying hereditary 
priesthoods are to be left in possession of them. In their appoint- 
ment we must observe a similar admixture of choice by lot to that 
advocated in the case of the /SovXevraij and the SoKt/xacria must 
be strict. The Delphic Oracle will communicate directions as to 
worship and religion generally to six (?) official e^T^yyyrai elected 
from groups of the local tribes, and partly selected from among a 
larger number by the Oracle. Like the priests and priestesses 
they must be over sixty, but while the former only hold office for a 
year, the e^rjyrjraL are appointed for life. Vacancies caused by 
death are to be filled in by the tribe from which the deceased 
c^r^yT^rr^s came. Temple treasurers are to be appointed from the 
highest property-class by an election and SoKLfxaaria like that of 
the aTpaTTjyoL 

760 a 6. For the protection of the city we have the generals 
and other military officers, as well as the Tr/oDrav/ets, and we shall 
deal later with two other classes of city officials, i.e. the Astynomi 
and Agoranomi. As to the country districts, to each of the 
twelve equal divisions a tribe will be assigned by lot, and this 
tribe will have to appoint five Phroararchs, who must each choose 
twelve active young men, of their tribe, between 25 and 30 years 
old. Each tribal corps (of five officers and sixty men) shall serve for 
a month in one tribal area, and the whole body shall rotate twice 
through the areas, first from left to right, then backwards, that 
they may learn the country thoroughly in different seasons. This 
will take two years, after which a fresh corps will be appointed. 
Their duties will be (1) to watch the frontiers and construct de- 
fensive works of all kinds, (2) to keep internal peace and facilitate 
communication within the country, (3) to guard against floods on 
the one hand, and drought on the other, (4) to add to the amenities 
of the landscape, and provide gymnasia and public baths, (5) they 
are to constitute a tribunal for petty causes. They may " com- 
mandeer " slaves and beasts of burden for the public work — studying 
the convenience of the owners as far as possible in so doing. Any 
abuse of power or any corruption is to be regarded as a serious 
and disgraceful offence. They shall live a military life, under 
strict discipline, and with frugal fare : any desertion or dereliction 
on the part of the officers shall be punishable by the rank and file, 
the vofxo(f>vXaK€^ being the supreme authority in such cases. This 
discipline should create devotion to and respect for loyal service, 
which is far more important and valuable to a state and to indi- 
viduals than shilful command. 

27 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

763 c 3. For the City three Astynomi — chosen partly by lot, 
and partly by universal vote, from among the members of the 
highest property-class — are each to take four divisions of the city 
area into his charge. Their duty will resemble the non-military 
part of the duty of the Agronomi — roads, water-supply, town- 
planning will be under their charge. By a similar method of 
election five Agoranomi are to be appointed from the two highest 
classes — to police the dyopd and have charge of the temple- 
buildings and fountains in it, and to enforce the state laws as to 
trade. Astynomi and Agoranomi are to try petty causes separately, 
larger ones in conjunction. 

764 c 5. The next officials to be elected are those who have 
charge of Education — mental and physical. Of these there are two 
kinds : (1) those who superintend schools and school-work, and 
(2) those who have charge of the arrangements for public contests. 
In this latter class the variety of subjects will necessitate a sub- 
division of provinces into (1) athletic contests and chariot-races ; (2) 
musical and dramatic individual performances, and (3) choric 
performances. For the third class one superintendent will suffice, 
who must be at least forty. For contests between single performers 
also one superintendent official will suffice ; he must be at least 
thirty. The choric and the solo superintendents must be chosen in 
the following manner : only musical adepts will be eligible, and 
only such will be compelled to elect — the vo/jiO(f)vXaK€s being the 
judges of who are such. — Of the ten who get most votes the lot is 
to choose one, who must further stand a SoKifxacrLa in which the 
only point considered is his musical ability. They are to hold 
office for a year. — For chariot-races and other gymnastic contests 
the superintendents — three out of a preliminary twenty — are to be 
elected from the third and second property -classes, and pass the 
requisite SoKt/xacrta — the three highest classes being compelled to 
vote. 

765 d 4. The superintendent of Education proper is by far the 
most important official in the whole state, for the first stage of the 
growth of plant, animal, or man has more influence than any other 
upon its ultimate development ; and the higher the organization 
the greater the possibilities for evil as well as for good. He must 
be above fifty, and the father of legitimate offspring ; he must be 
a vo/xo<^vAa^, and be selected by the whole body of state officials 
— not counting the /3ovX.€VTaL or TrpvTdvets as such — and the 
election must be by ballot, in the temple of Apollo, and be 
succeeded by the SoKi/xao-ia. 

28 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK VI 

766 C 2. Vacancies in any office — or among the guardians of 
orphans — are to he filled up by the original appointers. In the 
latter case the vacancy must be filled up within ten days, and the 
appointers — relatives on both sides — are to be fined a drachma a 
day each as long as they are in default. 

766 d 3. As to Law Courts — the judges in which are a kind of 
magistrate — full details cannot be settled till all the laws are 
made ; but we may give here a sketch of the principles of their 
constitution. — We expect wisdom and enlightenment from our 
judges — not bare decisions only, but reasoned judgements — there- 
fore they must be few and good. At the same time certain public 
offences must be tried by a democratic tribunal, for everyone is 
wronged by offences against the state ; and there must be no kind 
of court of first instance in which any citizen is disqualified from 
holding a place — this is a fundamental right of every member of 
the community. (In some courts at all events the position of the 
public seems somewhat to resemble that of a niodevn jury.) Private 
causes should be first tried before an informal assembly of friends 
and neighbours, with two appeal courts above it. — In private 
causes, if both sides agree to refer the decision of the matter to 
a particular court, the decision shall be final. Where one man 
impeaches another, whether the offence be private or public, there 
are to be two appeals. The final court of appeal for all causes is 
to be instituted thus : on the last day of the old year all the state 
officials are to assemble in a temple, and choose on oath one judge 
from each set of officials ; and then to scrutinize the list. — 
Bouleutae and the magistrates who choose the magistrates must be 
present when the court delivers judgement ; it must be open to 
the public, and judges are to be liable to impeachment for unjust 
judgement before the vo/xo^vAa/ce?. 

768 d 7. So much for the magistracy — the framework of 
government — : now we turn to the Laws, and in these we must not 
expect finality at the first attempt. With a view to their 
modification as the result of time and experience, we must 
endeavour to imbue the Nomophylakes with the true legislator's 
spirit ; they must see clearly that the result of all legislation is the 
perfection of the individual, and the removal, and the discrediting 
of all that hindei-s it. Neither individual nor state must be 
content to survive the abandonment of this ideal. 

771 ^ 5. All laws should have their foundation in religion. 
The number of households indicated above is 5040. There is an 
adaptability and a consonance with the general order of things 

29 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

about this number which should make our people regard it as 
sacred. Each twelfth part of this number is to form a community 
with a patron deity of its own ; and two monthly festivals, one in 
town, and one in the country are to be celebrated by it. The 
effect of these will be not only religious, but social ; they will 
bring the people of the community together, and make them 
known to each other. Above all they will facilitate suitable 
marriages between the families. The diversions, especially for the 
young, at these festivals will be under the superintendence of the 
directors of choruses, and the vofxo(f>vXaK€S. It will take at least 
ten years to make satisfactory arrangements for these festivals ; 
when once fixed, they should only be altered by an unanimous 
vote, and with religious sanction. 

772 d 5. Every man should be married by thirty-five. 

The sort of marriage must be that which is best for the state, not 
that which is most to the taste of the individual. — Rich should 
not aim at marrying with rich ; if they do, wealth will pile itself 
up at one end of the scale, and poverty increase at the other. 
Like should not seek like in character either : the marriage of 
people of oj)posite temperaments will keep the balance more level 
in character as well as property. Another important point in the 
exhortation to be addressed to young men will be that marriage is a 
duty to the community. — A man who is unmarried at thirty-five 
must pay a yearly tax according to his property-class, and shall be 
held dishonoured thereby. — Another penal off'ence will be the 
giving or receiving a dowry beyond what is necessary for the 
trousseau suitable for each class. — Relatives on the father's or 
mother's side shall have power to act as legal representatives of 
bride or bridegroom, in proportion to their nearness — the father's 
side to have precedence. — For wedding ceremonies the Exegetae 
must be consulted. — There must be a sumptuary law to limit the 
sum expended on the wedding-feast. Above all the bridegroom 
and bride must be abstemious as to wine on the occasion : then if 
ever " to begin well " is a sacred duty. — The newly-married pair 
should migrate to the country - house of the family ; so much 
separation will improve the family relationship, and the young 
couple will rear their family, like good citizens, by themselves. 

776 b 5. Next to marriage comes the subject of Property, and 
the property that will need the most careful treatment is house- 
hold slaves. Very various are the opinions expressed as to the 
character and value of slaves, and very difficult it is to give rules 
for their treatment — mainly because both slaves and masters are 

30 



ANALYSIS OF BOOK VI 

of such different characters. There are slaves who might be 
trusted to be masters, and there are masters who would be better 
as slaves. Two practical precepts may be given on this head : (1) 
slaves should not be of the same race as their masters ; (2) we 
should guard against injustice towards slaves more rigidly than 
against injustice to a free man. — Nowhere does a man display his 
goodness more clearly than in his treatment of his dependants. 
Still, when they have deserved it, slaves should be punished, but 
you should not argue with them — nor should you ever be familiar 
or intimate with them ; it will make the relationship worse both 
for the slaves and for yourselves. 

778 b. Though the house must naturally be built before the 
family settles in it, the importance of marriage is an excuse for 
postponing the question of Building till now. — Temples should be 
built round the agora, and on elevated ground all about the city. 
— Adjoining the temples should be the official residences of the 
magistrates, and the law-courts for capital cases. — The city need 
not have walls : they make a city unhealthy ; they tempt armies 
to retire within them, and diminish the caution of the guards ; 
the rural and other forces and the frontier and rural defence-works 
will render walls superfluous. At the same time, a partial sub- 
stitute for walls may be provided, if it is thought necessary, by 
turning the blind side of all houses towards the streets, and build- 
ing them in continuous blocks. The Astynomi will have to 
arrange the houses with this object, and to take care that no 
private building shall be an obstacle to defensive operations. — The 
surface-drainage will also be in their charge. Here, as elsewhere, 
the Nomophylakes must revise and emend the laws, where neces- 
sary, with a view to public convenience. 

779 d 7. In dealing with the regulation of the life of the newly 
married couple we enter upon difficult and dangerous ground. 
There is a general notion that the lawgiver should only touch 
public life, and leave private life alone. I expect much ridicule 
and opposition, therefore, to my proposal to make both husband 
and wife members of syssitia, and so to interfere with the private 
life of women, who have hitherto been allowed to shrink com- 
pletely from all publicity. The syssitia for men was a great 
innovation, and nothing but a fortunate chain of circumstances 
could have served to establish it where it exists. Now I say that 
much of the good which such an institution might do is lost 
at present because tcomen are not included. Not only is law and 
order more efficacious for good in a civic community than in an 

31 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

individual, but its absence is more mischievous. The danger is all 
the greater in this case, because women are morally worse than 
men to begin with (!). In view of the immense changes which 
history and observation of other nations show us to have taken 
place in men's feelings about all manner of things, I do not 
despair of the possibility of assent to this legislation. 

782 d 10. The fact is, there are three imperative desires, on the 
satisfaction of which the existence of the race depends : that for 
food, that for drink, and that for sexual union — and the good, 
both of individuals and the state, depends on these desires being 
satisfied in the right way. To put it shortly, the right principle 
which should guide men in the satisfaction of these desires is that 
the good of the community should come to count for more than 
the pleasure of the individual. The means to be taken to bridle 
these dangerous impulses are also three — fear, habit, and philosophy, 
and the help must be invoked of the Muses, and the religious 
festivals. 

783 b 2. I will leave the subject here, in the hope that the 
spirit of my remarks may pervade the legislature, and that in the 
complete code room may be found for such a regulation of private 
life as I have advocated. 

783 d 8. All communion heightens the effect of right endeavour, 
but also increases the mischief of carelessnes or slackness. In this 
marriage-union both the parties should strive above all to give the 
state the best citizens they can produce. A class of wise women 
officials should exist in the state to enlighten the newly married 
in the methods for securing this end, with powers to keep them 
up to their duty during the first ten years of their married life. 
Failure of offspring during these ten years should be held to be a 
ground for divorce. The ultimate tribunal in cases of divorce 
should be the relatives of both sides, with Nomophylakes as 
assessors. When right feeling pervades a community, many of 
these regulations will remain a dead letter, but they should be 
there for the punishment of offenders. 

785 a 3. Birth registers should be kept by public officials in 
each (fyparpia. 

785 b 2. A woman should marry between 16 and 20, a man 
between 30 and 35. — No woman magistrate must be under 40 ; 
no man magistrate under 30. — The age for military service for a 
man is between 20 and 60 ; for a woman — if she has to serve — 
between 40 and 50. 



32 



NOMOI 

A0HNAIOS SENOS KAEINIAS KPHS 
MEriAAOH AAKEAAIMONIOS 



VOL. I 33 D 



BOOK I 

SHORT ANALYSIS 

622a-632d7. — Spartan and Cretan State institutions teach, 
us that law should foster virtue — i.e. aim at producing human 
perfection — but they take too narrow a view of what virtue is — 
they look to bravery alone, and that is only a part, and that the 
least valuable ])art, of virtue. 

632 d 8-636 e 4. — How virtue is to be fostered — e.g. temperance. 
In the case of courage and temperance the processes seem similar. 

636 e 4 to end of Book. MWrj. 

637 b 7. — Medrj bad because unregulated. 

641 a 3 to end of Book. The right use of [xWrj. 

643 a 2. — What education implies. 

644 b 6. — Education consists in the regulation of the effects of 
pleasure and pain. Qf TT 

645 d 1. — The practical application of fiWr] in education. * 

A0. Gcos" rj Tts" dvdpcoTTOjv vfJiZVy CO ^eVot, €tXr](f)€ rrjv a 
air Lav rrjs tojv vofMcov Staddcrecos ; 

KA. Geo?, 60 feVe, deos, (x)s ye to StAcatdrarov elireZv' 
napa [xev rjfjLLV Zeus", irapa Se Aa/ceSatjUOVtots", odev oSe 
iaruv, olfxai cf)dvaL rovrovs ATrdAAcova. -q yap; 5 

ME. Nat. 

A0. Mojv ovv Kad^ "Ofxrjpov Xey^LS (hs rod MtVco <f)OL- 
TOJVTOS TTpos rrjv rod rrarpos iKacrrore avvovoruav 8t' ivdrov b 
€Tovs Kal Kara rds Trap eKeivov (jy-qixas rat? iroXeoLV vfjLLV 
QivTOS Tovs vofjiovs; 

KA. Aeyerat yap ovrco Trap* rjfjitv' Kal Srj Kal rov aSeA- 
(j)6v ye avTov *PaSdfjLav6vv — aKovere yap to ovopia — 8t/catd- ^ 
TaTOv yeyovivai. tovtov ovv (jyalfxev dv rjixetg ye ol KprJTes, 625 
e/c Tov Tore BiavepieLV Ta nepl rds" St/cas", opdcjs tovtov tov 
€TTaLvov avTov €i\ri<f>evaL. 

35 



625 a 



HAATfiNOS 



A0. Kat KaXov ye to /cAeos" vel re Atos" /xaAa irpiTTOv. 

5 iTTethr] Se iv tolovtols rjOeai T€dpa(f)d€ vofiiKoZs orv re /cat 

oSc, TTpoahoKCj ovK av drjSoJS irepi re TToXireias ra vvv kol 

vofjicov rrfv hiarpi^iqv, Xeyovras re /cat aKovovras dfjia Kara 

b rr]V TTOpeiav, TTotiqaaudaL. ttolvtcjos S' 17 ye e/c Kvcucrov 080? 

els TO Tov Alos dvrpov /cat Upov, cos OLKovofjiev, iKavrjy /cat 

avaTrauAat /cara tt)^ oSov, ojs eiKoSt nviyovs ovtos tcl vvv, 

iv rots' vi/jTjXols hevhpeaiv etcrt OKLapai, /cat rat? rjXiKiats 

5 TTpeTTOV dv r]fX(jjv elr] to StavaTrauecr^at ttv/cvo, cV aurats", 

Xoyois re aAAT^Aous" TrapapivdovjjLevovs ttjv oSov diraaav ovtoj 

fierd paGTcLvrjS hiarrepdvai. 

KA. Kat pLrjv euTiv ye, c5 ^eve, Tvpo'CovTi KVTrapiTTCov re 
C ev rots' aACTeotv vipiq koI KaXXrj davfjidaia, /cat Xetpicoves ev 
oIglv dvarravofxevoi StarptjSotjitev dv. 
A0. ^Op6(x)s Xeyeis. 

KA. riavi; /x€v ow* tSovrcs" Se fxaXXov (f)'qaopLev. dAA' 
5 'iajjxev dyadfj tvxJ}' 

A0. Taur' eti]. /cat /xot Xeye' Kara tL ra avGaLTid 
Te vfjiXv ovvTeTaxev 6 vofios /cat ra yvfivaaia /cat ri^v rcDv 
ottXojv e^iv ; 

KA. Oi/xat /xeV, ct) |"eVe, /cat ttovti pdhiov viroXa^eZv elvai 

10 ra ye rjixerepa. rrjv yap ttjs xcvpas Trduris KjOTyrT^s" (f>v(Jiv 

d Spare cos' ou/c eWt, Kaddrrep 7] tcov SeTTaXwv, ireSids, Sto 

8t) /cat rots' jLtev Ittttols e/cetvot ;(;pc(jvrat fxaXXov, SpofjiOLGLV 

Se Tjixets' 'rjSe yap dvcopuaXos av /cat tt/dos' r-i^v roiv ttc^t^ 

hp6p.(x>v daKYjOTLV fjidXXov avfJifJLeTpos. €Xa(f)pd Srj ra OTrXa 

5 dvayKaXov ev tco toiovtco KeKrrjadai /cat jjurj ^dpos e^ovra 

OeZv Tctjv St] to^cov /cat ro^evfjidTWv rj kov^6t7]s ap/xorretv 

80/cet. TavT ovv TTpos tov TToXefjLOV rj/jitv diravTa e^iqpTVTai, 

e /cat Trdvd^ 6 vojJLoOerrjs, ws y epiol ^atVerat, jrpos rovro ^Xe- 

TTCOV cruveTdTTeTO' eiTel /cat ra avauiTLa Kivhvvevei ovvaya- 

yeZv, opojv d>s Trdvres oTTorav OTparevcovTai, rod vtt^ avTOV 

TOV TTpdyfiaTOs dvay/ca^ovrat (f)vXaKrjs aurcDv eveKa gvctgl- 

5 retv TOVTov tov xpovov. dvoiav hr] fioL 8o/c€t Karayvcovai tcov 

TToXXcov COS" ov fiavdavovTcov OTL TToAe/xos" act TrdoLV hid ^iov 

(jvvex'^s eoTi Trpog drrdoas rds" TroAets'. el Srj TToXepiov ye 

dvTos (f>vXaK7Js eveKa 8et ovGairelv /cat rtvas" dpxovras /cat 

626 dpxofxivovs StaKeKOGiJLiqfxevovs etvat <f)vXaKas avTCov, tovto 

Kal ev eiprjvp Spaareov, fjv ydp KaXovaiv ol TrXeloroL tcov 

36 



N0M12N A 626 a 

dvBpcoTTcov €lp7]vr]v, rovr elvai fxavov 6Vo/xa, to) S ^PYV 
TrdoxLLS TTpos Trdaas rds TroAetS" act rroXefiov aKYjpvKTOV Kara 
(l>vcnv elvai. /cat ax^^ov duevprjucLS, ovrco gkottcov, tov 5 
li^prjTcjjv vofjLod€TT]v (!)£ 6t? TOV 77oAe/xov dnavTa SrjjjLocna Kai 
ISta rd vofjiifjua rjfxXv dTro^Xerran' avverd^aro , /cat Kara ravra 
ovTw (f)vXdTT€Lv 7rapeSojK€ Tovg vofJLOVi, COS" Twv dXXojv ovSevo? b 
ovSev o^eXos ov ovre KrrjjjidTUJV ovr eTnrrjSevfjLarcjv , dv 
fjLT] rep TToXejJLO} dpa Kparfj rt?, Trdvra Se rd toju viKcofievcov 
dyaOd twv vlkcovtcdv yiyveadaL. 

AO. KaAcSs" ye, c5 ^eve, cfyalvr) /xot yeyvfjuvdaOai Trpos to 5 
StetSeVat rd li^prjTcbv vofxtfjua. roSe Se jjloi <j)pdl,e en Ga(f)€- 
arepov ov ydp opov edov rrjs ev TToXirevopLevqs vrdAecos", 
Sofcets" /xot Xeyeiv ovrw KeKoapbrjixevr^v oIk€lv Selv, (hare c 
TToAe/xo) viKav rds dXXas TToXeig. rj ydp; 

KA. Udvv fjL€V ovv oljjLat 8e /cat ra>Se ovrcj avvSoKelv. 

ME. Ila>£ ydp dv aAAo)? diroKpivairOy cL dele, Aa/ceSat- 
jjLovlcov ye ocrnaovv; 5 

A0. ndrep* ovv Srj TToXeat puev rrpos noXeis opBov rovr 
ecrriy Kcofir) Se Trpos KcofjLTjv erepov; 

KA. Ovhapicjjs. 

A0. 'AAAa ravrov; 

KA. Nat'. 10 

A0. Tt he; TTpos OLKLav olklo, ra>v ev rfj kcLjjltj, /cat npos 
avopa avopL evt rrpos eva, ravrov en; 

KA. Tavrov. 

A0. Avrcp Be TTpos avrdv TTorepov ws TroAe/xto) Trpos d 
TToXejjLLOv Siavorjreov ; rj ttcjs en Xeyofiev; 

KA. ^Q. $eve ^ ABrfvaZe — ov ydp ae ^ArriKov eOeXoijji dv 
TTpoGayopeveiv So/ccts" ydp /xot ri]s 6eov errcovvfiLas d^ios 
elvai fjidXXov eTTOvopbdi^eadaL' rov ydp Adyov evr' dpx^v 5 
opdws dvayaycbv aa(f)e(jrepov eTTOirjGas, dxjre paov avevpr^- 
aets" OTt vvvhrj v(j>^ t^/xcDv opdcjs epp-qdrj ro TroAe/xtous" etvai 
Tvdvras Trdcnv 87^/xoata re, /cat tSta eKdarovs avrovs a(f)L(nv 
avroLS. 

A0. Hcos etpr^Kas, co OavpudaLe; C 

KA. Kavrau^a, cS ^eve, ro viKav avrov avrov Traawv 
VLKcov TTpcorr] re /cat dpiarrj, ro Se rjrrdadaL avrov u^' eavrov 
irdvrojv alox^fyrov re a/xa /cat KdKiarov. ravra ydp cLs TvoXe- 
fiov ev eKdaroLs tjjjlojv ovros Trpos rjjJids avrovs ar^fxalvei. 5 

37 



626 e nAATi2N02 

A0. ITaAn' Toivvv rov Xoyov avacrrpe^co/xev. ineLhr) 
yap els eKacrros rjixajv 6 /xev Kpeirrcov avTov, o 8e rjTTCDV 
627 €<7Tt, TTorepa (fyajfjiev OLKcav re Kal Kcofjirjv Kal ttoXlp e^^LV 
ravTov TOVTO ev avraZs rj fjirj (f)copiev; 

KA. To Kpeirro} re iavrijs elvai Xeyeis rcvd, rrjv 8' '^tto); 

A0. Nat. 

5 KA. Kai TOVTO opdcos rjpov rrdvv yap eWt Kal a(f)6Spa 

TO TOiovTOVy ovx rfKLOTa ev rats' TToXeouv. ev oTToaais fiev 

yap ol dfjL€Lvove£ vlkojglv to ttXtjOos Kal tovs xetpous', opdcos 

av avTT] KpeiTTCov re eavTrjs XeyoiO^ r] ttoXis, eiraivolTo 

re av StAcatorara Trj TOiavTTj vlktj' TOvvavTiov 8e, ottov 

10 ravavrta. 

b A0. To jLteV ToivVV €L 7TOT€ eGTiV 7TOV TO ^^IpOV KpetTTOV 

Tov apieivovos edawpiev — puaKpoTepov yap Xoyov — to Se vtto 
GOV XeyopLevov puavdavw vvv, ws TTOTe TToXiTai, Gvyyevets Kal 
TTJs avTTJs rroXeojs yeyovoTes , dhiKoi Kal rroXXol GvveXdovTes, 
5 BiKavovs eXdTTOVs ovTas jStaaovrat 8ofAou/xevot, Acat orav 
piev KpaTTjGCJGLV , tJttojv rj TToXts avTTJs opdios avTY) XeyoLT^ 
av dpba Kal KaKrj, ottov S' av rjTTajvTai, KpetTTCOv re /cat 
dyaOt] . 
C KA. Kat pidXa aTOTTOVy tb ^eve, to vvv XeyopLevov opuws 
8e opLoXoyelv ovtcjs dvayKaioTaTov. 

A0. "E;i^€ S-q. Kal ToSe rrdXiv eTnGKeipcjpieda' ttoXXoI 
aheX(f)OL TTOV yevoLVT av evos dvhpos re /cat puds vels, Kal 
5 Srj Kal davpLaGTov ovSev tovs TrXelovs p^ev dStKovs avTCov 
yiyveGO at, tovs Se eXdrTOVs St/catous'. 
KA. Ov yap ovv. 

A0. Kat ovK av elrj ye Trpeirov epLoi re /cat vpiZv tovto 

Orjpeveiv, otl vlkcjvtcov p,ev tojv TTOvrjpdJv rj re ot/cta /cat rj 

10 Gvyyeveia avTrj iraGa tJttcov avTrjs Aeyotr' av, KpeiTTOJV he 

d r)TTOjpieva)V' ov yap evG-)(r]piOGVviqs tc /cat dGX'^P'OGVvrjs 

prjpidTajv eVe/ca ra vvv GKOirovpieda Trpos rov tcov ttoXXojv 

XoyoVy aAA' opOoTTjTos re /cat dpuapTias irepi vopLOJV, tJtcs 

TTOT €GtIv (l>VGeL. 

5 KA. *AXrj6eGTaTa, <L ^eve, XeyeiS' 

ME. KaAcDs" /xev ovv, u)S ye epuol GwhoKelv, to ye togov- 
Tov, ra vvv. 

A0. "IScojLtev Srj Kal roSe* tovtols toXs dpTL XeyopLevoiS 
a8eX(f)OLS yevoLT dv ttov tls hiKaGT-qs ; 

38 



SNOMfiNfA 627 d 

KA. Ildvv ye. 10 

A0. ndrepos" ovv dfjLeLVOJV, ocrrts rovs fiev aTToXiaeiev 
avTwv OGOL KaKOL, Tovs Sc fieXrlovs dpx^ii^ avrovs avrcov e 
npoGrd^eLeVy rj o8e os dv tovs fJ^€v ;\;/37^crTOL'S" dpx^iv, tovs 
X^ipovs S' idaas ^rjv apx^adat eKoVTas 7toli^G€L€V ; TpiTOV 
8e TTOV ScKaaTrjv rrpos dpeTTjv €L7TOJfJL€v, et tls cltj tolovtos 
OGTLS TTapaXa^d)v avyyeveiav piiav SLa(f>€pofi€vrjv, jJL'qTe (xtto- 5 
Aecretev /xTySeVa, SiaXXd^as 8e, els tov eiriXoiTTOV XP^^^^> 628 
vofJLOvs avTOLS decs, irpos dXXriXovs 7rapa<j)vXdTT€iv hvvaLTO 
o}GT€ elvai <f)iXovs. 

K^\. Ma/cpoi dfjL€LVCov yiyvoLT^ dv 6 tolovtos BiKaaTi^s t€ 
/cat vofjLodeTTjS' 5 

A0. Kat pLTjv TOVvavTiov yt rj irpos TroXefiov dv ^XeTTCOV 

aVTOLS TOVS VOfJLOVS SiavOfJLodeTOL. 

KA. TovTO fxev dXrjdes. 

A0. Tt 8* d TTjv ttoXlv awapfjLOTTOJV ; rrpos TToXefiov 
avTTJs dv TOV e^coOev ^Xeircjov tov ^lov KoapLoZ jJidXXov, 10 
-^ TTpos TToXefjLOV TOV iv avTTJ yiyvofievov eKdoTOTe, 7] hr^ h 
KaXelfai OTdais; ov fidXiOTa fxev anas dv ^ovXolto pLTjTe 
yeveadai ttotc iv iavTOV TroXec yevofxevov re (Ls rap^tcjTa 
aTraAAarrecr^at . 

KA, ArjXov OTL rrpos tovtov. ^ 

A0. HoTepa 8e dTToXofjuevcjov av tojv irepcov elprjvriv ttjs 
GTdaeojs yeveadai , VLK-qadvTOJv he 7roTepa>v, Se^atr' dv tls, 
pidXXov Tj (j)iXias T€ KOL elprjvr]s vtto hiaXXayajv yevofxevrjs, 
ovtoj Tols e^ojOev TToXepbiois irpoaex^LV dvdyKrjv elvaL tov 
vovv ; C 

KA. Ovtoj rrds dv edeXoL npoTepov iq ^Keivws jrepl ttjv 
avTOV yiyveadaL ttoXlv. 

A0. OvKOVV Kal vopLoOerris woravTCos; 

KA. Tt fJii^v; r 

A0. ^Apa ovv ov TOV apiGTOv eveKa ndvTa dv ra vofJLLfjia 
TLdelrj TTas; 

KA. Ud>s 8' ov; 

A0. To ye fjLTjv dpiGTOV ovTe 6 noXepbos ovTe rj araGLS, 
airevKTOV 8e to herjdrjvai tovtojv, elprjvr] he Trpos dXXijXovs 10 
a/xa Kal ^iXo<j)poGvvri, Kal hrj Kal to VLKav, ws eoLKev, avrrjv 
avrrjv rroXiv ovk rjv tcov apioTWV aXXd twv avayKaiojv ^ 
opLOLOv cos el KafjLvov acD/xa LarpLKrjs Kaddpaecos tvxov rjyoLTO 

39 



628 d nAATllNOS 

TtS" dptara TrpdrreLV rore, rw 8e /jirjSe to rrapaTrav Ser^ddvrc 
adjixari fjurj^e Trpoaexoi rov vow, ojoavrcxys he kol Trpos 

5 TToXeoJs evhaipLoviav rj kol lSlcotov StavoovpLevog ovrco tls 
ovr dv TTore ttoXltikos yevoLTO opdojs, irpos rd e^cudev iroXe- 
jXiKa dTTO^XeTTOJv fjiovov Kai TrpcJorov, ovr dv vofModerr^s 
dKpi^rjS, el fjLTj X^P^^ elpriviqs rd TToXe/jiov vopLoderoL jjidXXov 

e ^ rdjv TToXepLlKcov €V€Ka rd rrjg elpTjvrjg. 

KA. OatVerat puev ttojs 6 Xoyos ovros, cL ^eve, opOcJos 
eiprjadai, davjjbdl^co ye jJLrjv eu ra re Trap rffxiv vd/xt/xa Kai 
en rd irepl AaKeSatfjiova jjltj Trdoav rrjv cnrovSrjv rovrojv 

5 eveKa TTeTTOiT^rac. 

629 A0. Tap^' dv LGCos' SeX Se ovSev aKXrjpdjg rjfjidg avrovs 

hiapidx^Gdai rd vvv dXX rfpejia dvepwrdv, d>s fxaXiara 

TTepl ravra rjficJov re Kai eKeivojv <J7TOvhal,6vrcx)v . Kai (xoi 

ra> Xoyo) orvvaKoXovOrjaare . TrpoarrjcrwjJLeda yovv Tvpraiov, 

5 rov (f)V(TeL fxev "AdrjvatoVj rcjvSe Se TToXirrjv yevofievov , os 
Srj {jbaXiara dvdpwTTWV Trepl ravra ecTTOvhaKev etTTcbv on — 

ovr^ dv fjivrjGaLfJirjv ovr ev Adyo) dvhpa ndeLfirjv 

b ovr^ et ng TrXovuiayraros avdpcorrcov etrj^ (f)r]aLV, ovr el 
TToXXd dyadd KeKrrjjjievog, elircbv crp^eSdv drravra, os piTj Trepl 
rov TToXefjLOV dpioros yiyvoir del. ravra ydp aKi^Kods ttov 
Kai Gv rd TTOirjpiara' ohe fxev ydp ol/JLai, SiaKoprjs avrcJov ian. 

5 ME. Ildvv jxev ovv. 

KA. Kat piriv Kai Trap rjjJLas eXijXvOe KopLLuOevra eK 
AaKeSalpLovos . 

A0. "I^t vvv dvepcojjLeda KOLvfj rovrovl rov TTOirjrrjv ov- 
TCOGL 7TOJS' *'^0> Tvpraie, rroirjrd deiorare — hoKeZs ydp Sr] 

C GO(f)6£ rjfjitv elvai Kai dyaOos, on rovs puev ev rep TroAe/xo) 
hiacjyepovras SLa<f)ep6vrcx)s eyKeKOjpLiaKas — ^'§17 o^v rvyxd- 
vop,ev eyo) re Kai oSe Kai KXeivlas 6 Kvcoglos ovtogI Gvpu- 
(f)ep6fJLevol Got Trepl rovrov G^ohpa, d>s SoKovjJLev el 8e Trepc 

5 rdJv avrojv Xeyojxev dvSpojv 7) /xt^, ^ovX6p,eda Ga(f)dj£ elhevai, 
Xeye ovv tj/jllv dpa etSr] Svo TToXepiov KaOaTvep rjpieXs r^yfj 
Kai GV Ga(f)cos; 7) ttcos ; " Trpos raur' ot/xat Kav ttoXv (f)avX6- 

d repos eiTTOL Tvpraiov ns rdXrjOes, on Svo, ro jjLev o KaXov- 
fiev drravres GraGLv, os hr) Trdvrcov TToXejjLOJV ;)(aAe7766TaTOS', 
COS" e(f)afjLev rjjJLeLS vvvSij' ro Se aAAo TToXepLOV Bi^Gopiev otjjLaL 
yevos drravres cS Trpos rovs eKros re Kai dXXo<j)vXovs XP^~ 

40 



N0M12N A 629 d 

jxeda hia(^€p6jX€V0i, ttoXv Trpaorepov €K€lvov. 5 

KA. riois" yap ov; 

A0. <I>e/3€ 817, TTorepoyf, /cat npos TTorepoxiq iTracvajv rov 
TToXepLOVy OVTW9 V7T€p€7T'^veaas, rovs Se eifte^as rcov dvSpcjv; 
eoiKas jxev yap irpos rovs eVrds" €LprjKas yovv JjSe iv roXs 
TTOLtipLauLV y (hs ovSafxojs rovs roiovrovs av€-)(6pievog ^ ol firj e 
ToX/jLYjactjaLV fxev opdv (f)6vov at/xaroevra, 

/cat SrjLCov opiyoivr eyyvdev LarapievoL. 

ovKOVv ra piera ravra €L7TOLp,€V av r)p,€LS on " Su pikv cVat- 
veZs, cos eoLKaSi d> Tvprate, /xaAtcrra rovs irpos rov odveZov 5 
T€ /cat e^ojdev iroXepiov yiyvopiivovs e7n(f>avels ." cf)at7] ravr 
av 7T0V /cat opioXoyol; 

KA. Tt pLijv; 

A0. 'H/xets" 8e ye dyaOwv ovrcov rovrwv €r{, (f)apL€V dpLel- ^30 
vovs etvac /cat rroXv rovs iv rep pbeyturcp TToXepup yiyvopuevovs 
apiorovs Sia(f)avci)S' TTOLrjrrjv Se /cat rjpieis pidprvp* e^opiev, 
SeoyvLV, TToXirr^v rcov iv St/ceAta Meyapecui^, 6s (firjcnv — 

TTvarros dvrjp )(pvo-ov re /cat dpyvpov dvrepvaaadac 5 

d^Los iv p(aAe77^, Kvpve, hL-)(oaraGirj, 

rovrov 8?^ (jyapuev iv iroXepLCp ;(aAe7ra>Tepa) dpueivova iKeivov 
ndpLTToXv yiyveodaiy G-)(€.h6v ocrov dpL€Lva>v BiKaLoavvrj /cat 
uw^poavvT] /cat (f)p6vr)aLS els ravrov iXdovaat juer' dvhpeiasy b 
awTT^? pLovrjs dvSpeias. Tnaros p^ev yap /cat vyi,rjs iv ard- 
oeaw ovK dv rrore yevocro dvev avpLTrdarjs dperrjs' hia^dvres 
8 e^ /cat piaxopLevoL ideXovres dTTodvrjcrKeLV iv (L iroXepLCo 
<j>pat,ei Tvpraios rcov piLa6o(J)6pajv elalv 7ra/x7roAAot, Sv 5 
OL TrAetcrrot yiyvovrai Opaaels Kal a8t/cot /cat v^pioral /cat 
a<l)pove(jraroL g^^Sov dTrdvrcov, e/cros" 8?^ Ttva>v eu pudXa 
oXtyajv. TTOL Srj reXevra vvv rjpblv ovros 6 Xoyos, Kal ri 
<pav€p6v TTore Trotrjaai ^ovXr^Sels Xiyei ravra; hrjXov on c 
ToSe, (Ijs iravros pidXXov /cat o rfjSe rrapd Atos" vopioderrjs, 
Tjus re ov /cat apuKpov 6<f)eXoSy ovk dXXoae rj Trpos rrjv pueyi- 
arrjv aperrjv /xaAtcrra ^XeiTWv del O-qaec rovs v6p,ovs' eon 
0€y ws (l>r]cnv SeoyvLS, avrr] TriGrorrjs iv rocs 8etvotS', i^V 5 
TVS BiKaLOGVV7)v dv reXeav ovopidaeLev . tjv 8* av Tvpraios 
eTTrjveaev pidXiura, KaXrj puev Kal Kara Kaipov KeKoapLrjpLevrj 

41 



630 c HAATl^NOS 

to) 7roLr]Tfjy rerdprr) [xevroi oficus dpiOfjia) re Kal SwdfJieL rov 
d TLfjLLa etvat Aeyotr' dv opdorara. 

KA. ^Q. ieve, Tov vofjLoOerrjv rjfjLcbv dTTO^dAXofxev els 
Tovs TToppco vojjLoderag. 

A0. Ovx i]p^^^s y€y d) dpiare, dAA' rjfids avrovs, orav 
5 OLCojJLeda Trdvra rd t iv Aa/ceSac/xovt /cat to, rfjSe Trpos 
TOV TToXefJLOv /xaAtcrra ^XiiTovras AvKovpyov re Kal MtVct) 
TideodaL rd vo/xt/xa. 

KA. To Se TTCJS XPV^ 'rjP'ds XiyeLv; 

A0. "Q.G7T€p TO re dXrjOes otjjiaL Kal to StVatov VTrep ye 

e Setou dv8p6(; hiaXeyopievovs Xeyeuv, ovx ^-'^ ^rpos" dperrjg ri /xd- 

ptov, /cat ravra to (jyavXoTaTOv , ert^et ^XeTTCov, aAAa tt/dos" 

TTacrav dpeTTjv, Kal /car' ctSr^ J^rjTeZv avTcov tovs vofiovs ovS' 

(1776/3 ot TcDv vw ctSTy TTpoTidefievoL ^TjTOVGLV. ov ydp dv 

5 eKauTOS ev XP^^V ytyvr^rat, tovto ^rjTet vvv Trapadepievos, 6 

p.ev ra 77-€/9t rcui^ KXrjpojv Kal CTrt/cAi^pcuv, d 8e tt^s" at/ctas" 7re/ot, 

aAAot Se aAA' arra fjivpia rotaura* rjp,els Se (f)apLev elvau to 

631 7re/9t vopuovs /^T]Tr)p.a twv ev i^rjTovvTwv ayuTrep vvv r]pieZs 

rjp^dfjLeda. Kal gov ttjv puev e7TLX€Lpr)Giv ttjs e^r^yrjaecos Trepl 

TOVS vopuovs TTavrdiTaaiv aya/xaf to ydp du dpeTrjs dp- 

X^crOai, XeyovTa d)s eTiOei TavTTjs eveKa tovs vop^ovs, opdov 

5 OTt 8e TrdvTa els p^opiov dpeTrjs^ Kal TavTa to upuKpoTaTOVy 

e7Tava<f)epovTa e^iqaS^ avTOV vopioOeTelv, ovTe opdcos eVt /xot 

KaTe<f)dvrjs Xeyojv tov re vcrrepov vvv Xoyov tovtov Trdvra 

etprjKa 8td raura. tttj St] ovv ae eV dv e^ovX6p,rjv SteAd- 

b fievov Xeyeiv avTos re dKoveiv; ^ovXei gol (f)pdl,a); 

KA. Ildvv pLev ovv. 

A0. ** ^Q. ^eve," exprjv etTretv, ** ot J^prjTcov vopuoL ovk 

€lgIv pLaTTjv SLa(f)ep6vTOJS ev iraGLV ei58d/ct/xot to ts" "EAAi^otv 

5 exovGLV ydp 6pdd>s, tovs avToZs ^P^/^^Vous' evSalp,ovas dno- 

TeXovvTes . Trdvra ydp rdyadd TTopil,ovGiv. hiTrXd he ayada 

€GTLV, rd puev dvdpcoTTLva, rd 8e ^eta* rjprrjrai 8' e/c rcov 

deiajv ddrepa, Kal edv puev Sex'T]Tai ns rd fxeil^ova Traptoxa- 

C Tai /cat rd eXdrrova, el Se pbrj, Greperai dpL^oZv. eWt 

8e TO, pLev eXdrrova cLv rjyeZrai puev vyieia, KdXXos 8e hev- 

repov, TO Se rpirov Igx^S €tV re Spopiov Kal els rds dXXas 

TrdGas KLvqGeis r(h Gcopbari, reraprov he 87) ttXovtos ov TV(f)Xos 

5 aAA ogv pAeTTCov, avrrep a/x eTTrjraL cppovrjGei' o orj Trpcorov 

av Tcov dei(x)v 'qyepuovovv eGriv dyadcbv, rj (f)p6vrjGis, Sev- 

42 



N0M12N A 631 C 

repov Se jxera vov (ja)(f)pa>v ^vx^S €^t,s, €K Se tovtojv /x€t' 
avSpetas Kpadevrcov rpirov av eurj StKaLoavvrj, reraprov Se 
dvSpeia. ravra Se Trdvra eKeivojv efjLTrpoadev reraKrai (f)v- u 
G€L, Kal Srj Kal rep voixoddrrj raKreov ovtojs. [xerd Se ravra 
ras" dXXas irpoord^eLs rols iroXirais els ravra ^Xeirovoas 
avrols elvai SiaKeXevcrreov rovrcov he rd fxev avOpcLinva 
elg rd deXa, rd 8e BeZa els rdv rjyep.ova vovv avpLiravra 5 
^XeiTeiv' rrepL re ydfiovs dXXt^Xocs eTTiKOLVOVfievovs y fxera re 
ravra ev rats tojv Traihcjjv yevvrjaeatv Kal rpocjyaZs ocrot 
re dppeves Kal oaai di^XeLai veojv re ovrcov Kac em ro TTpe- e 
a^vrepov lovrcov p^e^pi yrjpois rificovra opOcbs eTTip^eXeZadai 
SeZ Kal dripLa^ovray ev Trdaais raZs r ovrcov o/xtAtats" Tas" re 
XvTTas avrojv Kal rds rjSovds Kal rds eTndvjJiias avjJLTrdvrcov 
re epcjrcov rds OTTOvhds e7reaKep.pbevov Kal Trapaire^vXaxoray 632 
ipeyeiv re opdws Kal eiraiveZv hi avrojv rcbv vofxcov ev opyaZs 
re av Kal ev (j)6^0LS, ocrat re hid hvarvx^av rapa^ai raZs 
ijfvxaZs yiyvovrai Kal oaai ev evrvx^o^is twv roiovrojv airo- 
(f)vyai, ocra re Kard vogovs rj Kard rroXefxovs rj Trevtas t] ra s 
rovroLs evavria yiyvopueva rrpoGTrirrrei roZs dvdpcoTTOLS Tradij- 
fMara, ev Trdaiv roZs roiovrois rrjs eKaarcov hiadeaews hi- 
haKreov Kal opiareov ro re KaXov Kal /xt]. fierd he ravra b 
avayKTj rov vofjLoOerrjv rds Kriqaeis tcov TToXirwv Kat ra 
avaXojfxara (j)vXdrreLV ovnv* dv yiyvrirai rpoTTOV, Kat ras 
TTpos aXXr^Xovs TTaGiv rovrois Koivoivias Kal hiaXvGeis eKOVGiv 
re Kat clkovglv KaB^ ottoZov dv eKaorov TrpdrrcoGiv rcov 5 
roLovrojv rrpos dXXijXovs errLGKOireZv, ro re hiKaiov [Kal ju,7^] 
ev ols eorcv [re] Kal ev ots eXXeiiTei, Kal roZs fJiev evireiOeGW 
rcjv vojjLOJv rijxds aTrovefjieLV, roZs he hvoireiQeGL hiKas raKras 
eTTtrtdevaL, fxexpiTrep dv rrpos reXos aTTaGrjs TToXtreias eir- C 
e^eXdcov, ihr] rcov reXevrrjGavrwv riva heZ rpoirov eKaorois 
yiyveGd at rds ra(f>ds Kal rt/xas" donvas avroZs dirovejxeiv 
heZ' Kanhojv he 6 dels rovs vopLovs aTraaiv rovrois <j)vXaKas 
eTTiarrjGei, rovs piev hid (ftpovrjaecns, rovs he hi* dXrjdovs 5 
ho^Tjs lovras, ottojs rravra ravra ovvhi^aas 6 vovs eiropieva 
Gaj(f)poGvvr) Kal hiKaioavvrj 0.770^17^17, aAAa fxr] irXovrco pirjhe 
<l>iXorip,ia." ovrojs, c5 $evoi, eyojye rjOeXov dv vfids Kal en d 
vvv ^ovXofiai hie^eXdeZv ttojs ev roZs rod Aids Xeyofievois 
vop,ois roZs re rod Uvdiov * AttoXXojvos , ovs Mivcos re Kal 
AvKovpyos edervVy eveariv re ndvra ravra, Kal otttj rd^iv 

43 



632 d nAAT12N02 

5 Ttva elXrj^ora StdS'qXd ianv rep irepl voficxjv ifJUTretpu) Tix^TI 
etre /cat riaiv edeoiv, rols 3e aAAots" rfyilv ovSajjLoJs eon 
KaTa(f)avrj . 

KA. Hojs ovv, d) ^€V€y Xeyeiv )(prj rd jxerd ravra; 
A0. 'E^ ^PXV^ TrdXiv efjLOLye Sok€l xPW^^ Sie^eXdelv, 
e KaOdirep rjp^djjieda, rd ri]? avSpelas Trpchrov eTTtrT^Seu/xara, 
€7T€LTa erepov /cat avQis erepov etSos" rrjs dperrjs 8te^t/xev, 
edv ^ovX-qade' ottojs 3' dv to irpchrov Sie^eXdajpiev, Treipauo)- 
pieda avro 7rapa8ety/xa depievoL /cat rdXX ovroj hiapivdoXo- 
5 yovvres Trapapivdia TTOirjaaGOaL rrjs oSov, varepov be dperrjs 
7rdar]s a ye vvvhrj hirjXOopiev e/cetae ^Xenovra d7TO(f)avovp,ev, 
dv deos edeXrj. 
633 ME. KaAcos" Aeyets", /cat ireipai TTpcorov Kpiveiv rdv rod 
Ato? erraiver'qv rovhe rjpLLV. 

A0. HeipdaopiaL, /cat ere re /cat epuavrov /cotvo? ydp 6 
Xoyos. Xeyere ovv rd GVGGLTid cfyapiev /cat rd yvpLvdata 
5 Trpog Tov TToXepLOV e^rjvprjaOaL rco vopLoderrj ; 
ME. Nat. 

A0. Kat rpirov r] reraprov ; locjs ydp dv ovrco XP^^V 

hiapidpirjaaoOai /cat nepl rcov rrjs dXXr^s dperrjs e'lre puepcov 

etre drr avrd KaXelv p^^pectjv eari, brjXovvra puovov a Xeyei. 

b ME. Tptrov roivvVy eywy* ctVotjit' dv /cat AaKeSatpiovLwv 

oariGovv, rrjv Orjpav rjvpe. 

A0. Teraprov Se, rj TTepuTTTov el hwaipieda, Xeyeiv 
TreipcopLeOa. 
5 ME. "Ert roivvv /cat to reraprov eyojye TreLpcppirjV dv 
XeyeuVy ro Trepl rds Kaprep-qaeis rdJv dXyrjhovcov ttoXv Trap' 
rjpLcv yiyvopcevoVy ev re rats' Trpos dXXrjXovs rats" X^/ocrt pidxoLi'S 
Kat ev dpirayaZs riaiv hid ttoXXcov TrXriycjv eKaarore ycyvo- 
puevoLiq. €Tt 8e /cat KpvTrreia ns 6vopidl,erai OavpiaaraJs ttoXv- 
C 7TOVOS rrpos rd? Kapreprjo'ecs, x^^P'^^^^ '^^ dvvTTohrjaiai /cat 
aurpcLXjiai /cat dvev OepaTTovrcov aurots" eavrojv SiaKOVT^aeis 
vvKrojp re irXavcopLevcov 8ta Trdcirjs rrjs x^P^^ '^^^^ P'^^ 
rjpiepav. en Se /cav rat? yvpuvoTraihiais Seti^at KaprepriaeLs 
5 Trap' ripLlv yuyvovrai rfj rod TTviyovs pf^P'Xl biapuaxopLevcov y /cat 
TTapLTToXXa erepay ux^bov dara ovk dv Travaacro ns eKaarore 
Sie^Lcov, 

A0. Eu y€y CO Aa/ceSatjLtdvte $evey Xeyecg. rrjv dvhpeiav 
Se, (f>epey ri dcopiev; TTorepov ctTrAcas" ovrws elvai Trpos <f)6^ovs 

44 



NOMfiN A 633 d 

Kal Xvnag Sta/xa;^T]v fiovov, ^ /cat Trpo? irodovs re Kal rjhovag d 
/cat Ttvas" Setvas" Scorreias KoXaKiKag, at /cat rcDv aefivajv 
olofjievcuv etvat, rovs dvfjLOv^ ttolovglv Krjptvovs ; 

ME. OfjLtat jLtev OVTW irpos ravra avfXTTavra, 

A0. Et yovv fJLefxvrifjLeSa rovs kixTrpoodev Xoyovs, Turret) 5 
Ttva o8e /cat ttoXlv eXeyev avrrjv avTTJs /cat avhpa. rj yap, co 
^€V€ Ki^cocrte; 

KA. Kat Trdvv ye. 

A0 . Nuv o w TTorepa Xiyopiev rov rcov Xvrrwv rjrraj /ca/cov C 
-^ /cat rov Tojv rjSovojv; 

KA. MaAAov, epLoiye So/cet, rov raiv tJ^ovcov /cat Trdvres 
TTOV fiaXXov XeyofjLev rov vtto rcov rjSovcbv Kparovfxevov tovtov 
rov eTTOvetStarcos' TJrrova iavrov Trporepov 7) rov vtto tcjv 5 

AuTTOJV. 

A0. *0 Atos" ovv Srj /cat o nv^t/cos" vofjLoder'qs ov S-qTTOV 034 
X(JtiXr)v TTjv dvhpeiav vevofJioOeTi^KaTOV , Trpos rdpiarepd p.6vov 
SvvajjLevrjv dvrt^atvetv, Trpos rd Se^ta /cat Kopupd /cat d(x)TT€V' 
Tt/ca aSuyaroucrav; 7) Trpo? djLt^orcpa; 

KA. n/oo? dfjL(f)6r€pa eycoye d^tcti. 5 

A0. Aeycofjuev roivvv TrdXiv eTnrrjSevfjLara TTola ecrO^ vpuv 
apL^OTepais rats TroAecrtv, d yeuovra roiv t^SovcDv /cat ou 
(f)€vyovra avrdg, Kaddrrep rds XvTras ovk €<f)€vy€V, dAA' 
dyovra els pbeaas, rjvdyKat^e /cat erreidev nfials wGre Kparelv 
avT(hv' — TTOV Srj rovr* eariv ravrov Trepl rds rjbovds aw- D 
rerayixevov ev rots vofjLOLs; XeyeaOo) tl tovt eanv o /cat 
aTvepydt^erai vpuv ofioicos Trpos re dXyrjSovas /cat Trpos 
TjSovds Tovs avTovs dvBpeiovs, VLKcovrds re d Set vt/cav 
/cat ovSapLcos 'qrrovs TToXejxiojv rcjv iyyvrara eavrcov /cat 5 
XaXeTTCordrcov . 

ME. Ovroj fxev roivvv , w ^eve, KaddTrep irpos rds dXyrj- 
Sdvas" et^ov vofiovs dvnrerayfjievovs ttoXXovs eLTretv, ovk dv 
LGOJS evTTopoLTjv Kard fxeydXa fJLeprj /cat Sia<f)avrj Xeycov Trepl C 
rcjv rjSovojv' Kard he afxiKpd lacos evrropoir^v dv. 

KA. Ou fXTjv ouS' dv avros eyojye ev rols Kard KpTyrr^v 
vop^OLs exoifJLL efji(f)aves ofioiajs TTOieZv ro roiovrov. 

A0. '^Q. dpiaroi ^evcov, Kal ovSev ye Bavpiaarov, dXX 5 
av dpa ris rjp^ojv Trepl rovs eKdarcov olkol vojjlovs ^^^J) ti, 
^ovX6p.evos Ihelv ro re dXrjdes d'/xa /cat ro ^eXnarov, firj 
XaXeTT(x)s dXXd TTpdws dTToSexd)pLeda dXXi^Xojv. 

45 



634 c nAAT0N02 

KA. ^OpOcos, (L $€V€ ^Adr]vaL€y €Lp7]Kag, /cat TreiGTeov. 
d A0. Ou yap dvy co KAetvta, TrjXiKotaSe dvSpdaiv TTpeTTOi 

TO rOLOVTOV. 

KA. Ov yap ovv. 

A0. Et fjLev Toivvv opOcbs tj /xtJ rig CTnrt/xa rfj re Aa/cw- 

5 VLKrj Kai rfj Y^pr^TLKfj TroAtreta, Aoyos av erepos eir]' rd 8* 

ow Aeyo/xet'a Trpos" tcov ttoAAojv tcrcus' cyco /xaAAov e;)^ot/x' 

av vpLCJV djji(f)or€pa>v Xeyeiv. vjjlZv fjiev ydp, euTrep Kal pi€- 

Tpiojs KareuKevaoraL rd rcjv v6p,cx)v, els tcjv /caAAtWdov dv 

elrj vopLOJV firj ^rjretv row vecov /XTySeva idv TTola KaXcog 

e avTcov t) pirj KaXcos €;)(et, paa 8e (pcovfj Kal i^ ivos aropiaros 

Trdvras avfjicficovetv d)s Trdvra KaXcbs Kelrai Oivrcov decov, 

Kal idv ns dXXcos Aeyi^, purj avex^odat ro Trapdirav a/cou- 

ovras' yepojv 8e €t ris tl avvvoel rchv Trap* vp.iv, Trpos 

5 dpxovrd re Kal Trpos rjXLKiwrrjv p^r^Sevos evavriov viov 

TTOietadai, rovs roiovrovg Xoyovg. 

KA. ^Opdorard ye, <L ^eve, Xeyeis, Kal Kaddirep pidvrtg, 
035 dncbv rrjs rore Stavota? rod ndevros avrd, vvv eTneiKcos pLOL 
SoK€LS eGTOxdadai Kal G(f)68pa dXrjdrj Xeyeiv. 

A0. OvKOVv rjpLiv rd vvv iprjpiia pikv vecov, avrol S' 

€V€Ka yrjpojs d^eipied* vtto rod vopuoderov ScaXeyopLevoc irepl 

5 avrwv rovrcov puovoi Trpos pLovovs pirjSev dv TrXrjpipLeXeiv; 

KA. "Eart ravra ovrcos' [els a] Kal pL7]Sev ye dvfjs eTTi- 

npicbv ToXs vopiOLS rjpidjv' ov ydp to ye yvcovai n rcbv purj 

KaXojv dnpiov, dXXd taatv e^ avrov avpL^aivet yiyveodai 

b Tip pLT) <f)d6vcp rd Xey6p,eva dXX evvoia Sexopievcp. 

A0. KaAcDs" ov pirjv emrLpicov ye epco roXs vopiois ttoj, 

TTplv ^e^alcos els SvvapuLV SiaGKei/jaadat, pidXXov 8e dTTopcov. 

vpLLV ydp 6 vopboderrjs piovois ^^XXnjvojv Kal ^ap^dpojv, wv 

5 rjpieis TTVvdavopieda, rcbv pLeylarcov rjhovojv Kal TTaiScajv eTre- 

Ta^ev dTTexeodai Kal pur) yeveodaiy to he twv Xvttcov Kal 

(f)6^a)v, OTTep dpTL SieXr]Xv6apiev, rjyqGaTO eu tls eK TralSajv 

C (j>ev^eLTai 8ta TeXovSt OTTOTav els dvayKatovs eXOrj ttovovs 

Kal c/io^ovs Kal XvTras, (fyev^eZodai tovs ev eKeivois yeyv- 

pLvaapLevovs Kal SovXevaeiv avrols. TavTOV Srj tovt\ otpLai, 

Kai Trpos rds rjSovds eSet SiavoeXoOaL tov avTOV vopLodeTJjV, 

5 XeyovTa avTov Trpos eavTOV d)s rjpiXv Ik vea>v el aTreipoL tcjv 

pLeyiGTCov r)Sovdjv ol TroAtrat yevqaovraL, Kal dpLeXeTrjTOi 

yiyvopLevoc ev TaXs rjSovaXs KapTepeXv Kal pL7]hev twv al^xpdyv 

46 



N0M12N A 635 c 

dvayKOL^eudaL rroieXv, cVe/ca rrjs yXvKvOvfuas ttjs npos ras 
TjSovas ravTOV rreiaovraL rols rjTTCOjJLivois tojv (f)6^cov, Sov- Q 
XevGovcri rporrov erepov Kal €t' at(7;\;tco rot? ye SwafxevoLg 
KaprepeXv iv rats r)SovaX£ Kal roZs K€Krr]iJL€VOis ra vept ras 
TjSovdg, dvdpwTTOLs ivlore TTavraTraaL KaKols, Kal rrjv i/^vx^jv 
rfj pL€v ^ov\r]v rfj 8e iXevdepav e^ovGiv, Kal ovk ol^lol dirXios 5 
dvhpeloL Kal iXevOepLOL- eaovrai TrpoaayopeveadaL. oko- 

7r€ LT€ OVV €1 TL TOJV VVV XcyOfXeVCOV VfJLLV KaTCL TpOTTOV SoAC€t 

Xiyeadai . 

KA. Ao/cet ix€v rjiJiiv ye ttcos Xeyofievov rov Xoyov irepl C 
Se rrjXiKovTCvv evdv^ TreTrtarcu/ceVat paSlcos fJirj vecov re rj 
fjidXXov Kal dvorjTixiv. 

A0. 'AAA' el TO fxerd ravra hie^ioifxev (Lv TTpovdefieda, 
(L KAetyta re Kal AaiceSat/xovte $eve — /xer' dvhpeiav yap Srj 5 
aa)(f)poo"uv7]s Trepi Xeycopuev — <pLU)V> n SLa<f)epov ev ravrais 
rats TToXireiais 7) rat? tcov ecKfj TToXirevofievcov dvevp'qaofxeVy 
CJGTTep ra Trepl rov ttoAc/xov vvvhiq; 030 

ME. Yi^^hov ov pahiov dAA' eoLKev yap ra re uvaaLria 
/cat ra yvpLvdaia KaXcos rjvprjadai npos dfx<f)orepas. 

A0. ''KoLKev Srjra, co ^evoL, x^Xeirov elvai ro Trepl rds 
TToXireias dvapL<j)L<j^rirrircos ofjLOLOJS €pycp Kal Xoyco yiyveaSai' 5 
Kivhvvevei yap, KaOaTrep ev rots' cwfJiaaLV, ov Svvarov elvai 
rrpoord^ai ri rrpos ev aajfia ev eTrtTT^Seu/xa, ev a> ovk dv 
(f)aveLrj ravrov rovro ra fiev ^Xdirrov ra rjixaJv cctj/xara, 
TO. Sc Kal d)(f)eXovv. errel Kal rd yvjjivdata ravra Kal ra D 
GVGdiria rroXXd puev dXXa vvv (x)(f)eXeZ ras" TToXeig, Trpos Se 
ra? ardaeig ;!^aAe7ra — SrjXovcriv Se MtATycxtcov Kal BoLcorcov 
/cat SovpLcov TTalSes — Kal Srj Kal naXai ov v6(JLi{i.ov SoAcet 
rovro ro eTnrrj^evjjia Ta^ Kara <f)vaiv [ras] Trepl rd d<j)pohiGia 5 
1780 vds" ov fJLOvov dvdpwTTOjv dXXd Kal Orfpicov, hie<l>BapKevai. 
/cat rovrojv rds vfierepas TrdAets" Trpcjras dv ris alncpro Kal 
oaai rdjv dXXcov fidXiara aTrrovrai rcov yvfivaaicov' /cat elre C 
TTait,ovra etre arrovSd^ovra evvoelv Set rd rotavra, evvorjreov 
on rfj drjXeLa Kal rfj rcov dppevcov (f)VGet els Koivojviav lovarj 
TTJs yevvT^Gecos rj Trepl ravra rjSovr] /caret (f)VGLV dTToSeBoodai 
80/cet, dppevojv Se rrpos dppevas r] drjXeLdjv Trpos drjXeias 5 
rrapd <^v(nv /cat rcjv Trpcorcov ro roXpiripJ elvai 8t' dKpdr eiav 
TjSovrjs. Trdvres Se Sr] ll^piqrdjv rov irepl TavvpL-qSr) pLvdov 
KarTjyopovfjLev ws XoyoTTOLrjGdvrcov rovrcov eTreLSrj irapd Aids' ^ 

47 



636 d HAATS^NOS 

avroug 01 vojjlol TreTnarevixlvoi rjuav yeyovevaij rovrov top 
fjivdov TTpoareB'qKevai Kara rod Atds, Iva CTTo/xevot S17 T(h 
deo) KapTTchvrai kol ravrrjv ttjv rjSovqv, to fiev ovv rod 

5 fxvdov x^Lperu), vojjlojv 8e Trept Siao Korrovfievojv avdpcjTTiov 
oXiyov Trdad ionv rj GKeifjis Trept re ra? rjSovas Kal ras 
AuTTa? eV T€ TToXeoLV Kal ev lSlols rjOeGLV Svo yap adrai 
TTrjyai jxeOelvrai (jyvaei pelv, (Lv 6 fxev dpvrofjievog odey re 

e Set Kal oTTore Kal ottoctov evSaifJiovel, Kal ttoXl? opioicos Kal 
iSicorrjg Kal l,cpov dnaVy 6 8' dve7narr}p,6v(jjs a/xa Kal eKros 
rwv Kaipcjv rdvavria dv eKeivcp ^(^rj. 

ME. Aeyerai puev ravra, w ^eve, KaXojs ttojs' ov [Mrjv 

5 aAA' d(j>aGia y r)p.d9 Xap^^dveu ri rrore XPV ^^y^^^ irpos 
ravra, opucos 8 epioiye opdcvg SoKet ro ras rjSovds <j>evyeLV 
hiaKeXeveoOai rov ye ev Aa/<-e8at/xovt vopboderr^v, irepl Se 
rwv ev Kvoxjo) vopuajv oSe, dv edeXr], ^orjOi^GeL. rd 8' ev 
637 ^TTaprrj /caAAtcrr' dvOpcoTTiov SoKet p,oi KeZaBai rd irepl rds 
rjSovds' ov ydp pidXiar* dvOpcoTroi Kal pLeylarais TTpoGiri' 
TTrovaiv rjSovaXs Kal v^peai Kal dvoia Trdarj, rovr^ e^e^aXev 
o vopLos rjpLOJV eK rrjs ^copas avpLTrdarjs, Kal ovr* dv eir* 

5 aypGiv t8ot?, ovr ev dareoiv oacov YiTrapridrais pLeXei, cru/x- 
TToata ovS oTToaa rovrois GweTTopueva irdoas r]^ovds KiveX 
Kara SvvapLLV, ouS' eGriv ocrrts" civ drravribv Kcopbd^ovri rivi 
b pier a piedrfs ovk dv rrjv pLeytGrrjv Slktjv evBvs eTnSeir], Kal ou5* 
dv lS.iovvGLa 7Tp6(f)aGLV e^ovr^ avrdv pvGairo, wGnep ev 
dpid^ais etSov Trore irap* vpulv eyo), Kal ev Tdpavn Se 
TTapd rotg rjpierepoLs diTotKois iraGav eOeaGdpbTjV rr)V ttoXlv 

5 TTepl rd AtovvGia pLeOvovGav irap" rjpLLV 8* ovk eor ovhev 
roLovrov. 

A0. '^O. AaKeSaipiovte ^eve, eiraiverd puev iravr eGnv rd 
roiavra, ottov nveg eveiGiv Kapreprjoeis , ottov he avelvraiy 

C ^XaKiKcxjrepa' ra)(v ydp gov Xd^oir dv ns rdv Trap rjpbojv 
dpLVvopievos, SeLKVVs rrjV rd>v yvvaiKCtiV Trap vputv dveGiv, 
diraGLV Srj rols roLovroLS, Kal ev Tdpavn Kal Trap rjpilv /cat 
Trap vpiXv Se, jLtta dTTOKpiGis diroXveodai 80/cet rov pbrj KaKws 

5 exeiv dXX opdcJos' Trds ydp dTTOKpivopievos epet Oavpidl^ovrL 

ievcp, rrjv Trap" avrols dijdetav opdivri, " Mt^ Oavpuat^e, co ^eve' 

vopios ecr^' r]pLlv ovroSy lgcos 8' vpulv Trepi avrchv rovroiv 

d erepos." rjpLLV 8' ecrrt vvv, w (j)iXoL dvSpes, ov irepl rdv 

dvdpcoTTcov rojv dXXcov 6 Aoyo?, dAAa Trept rwv vopioOercjv 

48 



NOMfiN A 637 d 

avrojv KaKias re /cat aperrjs. en yap ovv eLTroj/JLev vXeLco 
TTepl aTTOLcrrjs fiedrjs' ov yap afJUKpov iarcv to eTnrrjhevpia 
ouSe (f)avXov Scayvcovai vo/JLoderov. Xiyoj S* ovk olvov rrepl 5 
Trocrecus" to Trapdirav 7) pi-q, piedrjs Se a-urrjs Trepi, iror^pov 
u)G7T€p TiKvdaL ;)(pcDvrat /cat Uepaai XPV^'^^^^> '^^^ ^'^^ 
K.apxy]^ovLOL /cat KeArot /cat "l^rjpes /cat ©pa/ces", TroAe^Ltt/ca 
ovpiTTavra ovra ravra yevr), ri Kaddirep u/xcts" vpLets pL€V yap, e 
OTT-ep Aeyets", to Trapairav OLTrexecrOe, IjKvdai Sc /cat ©pa/ces" 
OLKparcp TTavraTTaGL xpc^P'^voL, yuvat/ces" re /cat avroi, /cat /caret 
T6UV tjLtartajv /caTa;(€OjLteyot, /caAov /cat evSaupiOV €7rtT7^Seu/xa 
eTTtTT^Seuetv vevopuKaaL. Hepcrat Se o(f>6hpa puev ;)(;pcI>VTat 5 
/cat rats' aAAats" rpv^ais as vp^eTs aTTO^dWere, iv rd^€L he 
puaXXov Tovrcov. 

ME. ^Q Aojo-re, SicoKopLev 8e ye rjpL€L9 iravras rovrovs, 638 
orav oTrAa ets" ra? x^^P^^ Xd^copLev. 

A0. ^n dpiare, purj Xeye ravra' iroXXal yap Srj (j>vyal 
/cat StaS^et? are/c/xaprot yeyovaaiv re /cat eaovrai, 8to ^a- 
vepov opov rovrov ovk dv irore AeyotjLtev, dAAa dpL(f)L(T^rjrT^- 5 
(jLpLOV, TTepl KaXojv eTTLrrjSevpidrcov /cat /xt^, vlktjv re /cat rjrrav 
Xeyovres pudxT]?' eTretSry yap at pueit^ovs rds eXdrrovs iroXeis 
VLKCJGLV piaxopievaL, /cat /caraSouAouvrat Supa/cocrtot p-ev b 
KoKpovs, olStj Sokovulv evvopLwraroL rcov rrepl eKelvov rov 
roTTOV yeyovevaiy Ketous" Se ^Adrjvatoi' puvpla Se dXXa rotaur* 
av evpoipiev. dAAa Trept avrov eKdorov €7nrrjSevpLaros rrei- 
pcvpLeda Xeyovres rreideLV rjpbds avrovs, vt/cas" Se /cat 'qrras 5 
e/cros" Aoyou ra vuv Odjpiev, XeywpLev 8' cos" ro p,ev rotovS' 
ccrrtv /caAov, to Se rotovSe ov KaXov. Trpcorov 8' aKOVoare 
ri pLOVy Tiept avroiv rofrcoi^ (Ls 8et rd re ^^pT^crrdt' /cat rd p-i) 
cr/co7retv. 

ME. Hajs" ow 817 Aeyets"; C 

A0. AoKOVGL pLOL Trdvres ol Xoyco rt Xa^ovres eTTirtj- 
Sevpua, /cat TrpodepievoL ipeyeiv avro rj cTratvetv evdvg prjdev, 
ovSapuaJS 8pav /card rpoirov, dXXd r avrov iroieZv olov el hrj 
rt?, eTratveaavros rivos ivpovg ^pwpia cog dyaOov, evdvs 5 
ipeyoL, pbT) StaTrvSopievos avrov pui^re rrjv epyaaiav puijre rrjv 
7rpoa(f)opdvy ovrcva rpoirov /cat olarLai /cat p-e^' (Lv /cat ottcos 
exovra /cat oTraJS" TTpoa<j)epeiv exovGiv. vvv hrj ravrov pLOi 
SoKovpLev rjpLels ev roZs Adyot? rroielv Trepl piedr]s yap d/cou- d 
oravres" roaovrov puovov, evdvs ol puev i/jeyeuv avro, ol 8' 

VOL. I 49 E 



638 d nAATI2N02 

€7TaLV€tv, /cat jLtaAa oltottcos. fxaprvGLV yap /cat €7raivirais 

Xpci)IJ^€voi [i7TaLvovfji€v] eKarepoi, [/cat] ol fieVy on ttoXXovs 

5 TTapexofJieda, d^Lovfiev rt Aeyety Kvpiov, ol 8e, ort tous" /xt^ 

Xpojfjievovs avTO) opcofjuev viKcovrag fiaxofxevovs' d!JL(f)t(j^rj- 

retrat S au /cat tovto rjfjLtv el fiev Sr] /cat irepl iKOLarcov 

e ovTCo /cat TcSv d'AAcov vopbi/Jbcov Ste^t/xev, ou/c av e/xotye /cara 

vow €tT7, rpoTTOV 8e d'AAov, ov e/xot c^atVcrat 8etv, ideXco 

Acyetv 7re/ot aurou Tourof, TTys" fxeOrj?, TreLpcxjfjievos dv dpa 

SvvojfjiaL rrjv Trepl aTravrajv rwv toiovtojv opdrjv fxeOoSov 

5 tjijlXv Sr]Xovv, irretSri /cat fjuvpla iirl [xvpioLS eBviq Trepl avrojv 

aiJi(f)La^r)TOVVTa vfjLtv TToXecn Svolv rw Aoyo) hiaybaxoir* dv. 

ME. Kat ixTjv el TLva exo/Jiev opSrjp GKeijjiv rdJv tolovtojv, 

639 ovK dTTOKvrjTeov dKOveiv. 

A0. TiKei/jcofjbeOa St] tttj rfjSe. cf)epe, el ris cdydjv Tpo(f)')jv, 
/cat TO ^a)ov avrd Krrjfjia d>s eariv koXov, erraLVol, dAAo? 8e 
Tis eojpaKcbs alyas x^P'^^ vejxojxevas aiTToXov ev epyaaipiois 
5 ;!^6t>/9tots" hpojoas /ca/cd hiaipeyoi, /cat rrdv dpepLpia dvapxov 7) 
pLerd /ca/cd) V dpxdvrojv ISdjV ovtcjo piepL(f)OLTO , rov rod tolovtov 
ijjoyov rjyovpieda vyces dv TTore ifje^at /cat oriovv ; 
ME. Kat TTCJs; 

A0. ^p-qcrrog Se dpxojv ead^ rjpbXv ev ttXoiols TTorepov edv 
b Tr]v vavTLKrjv exj] eTnari^pLrjv pLovov, dv r odv vavna dv re pLij, 
7] TTCJS dv XeyoLpLev; 

ME. OvSapicJbg, dv ye Trpos rf\ rexvrj exj) f<al rovro ro 
irddos o Xeyeis. 
5 A0. Tt 8' dpx^v arparoTTeSojv ; dp^ edv rrjv TroXepLtKrjv 
exjj eTTLGrrjpiiqv y iKavds dpx^iv, xav 8etAos' ci)V ev rots SeivoXs 
V7TO piedrjs rod (f)6^ov vavna; 
ME. Kat TTws; 

A0. '^Av 8e av pbTjre exj) T'rjv rexvr\v 86tAds' re fj ; 
10 ME. rTavraTrao-tV rtva Trovrjpov Xeyeis, /cat ovSapbwg 

avSpcov dpxovra dXXd nvcov o-(f)6Spa yvvaiKOJv. 

C A0. Tt 8* eTTaiverrjv t) ifjeKrrjv KOivcovias rjanvoaovv fj 

7T€(f)VKev re dpx(J^v elvac puer eKelvov re (I)(f)eXLpL6s eariv, 

o Se pLTjre eojpaKCJS elr] ttot' opddjg avrrjv avrfj Koivcjvovoav 

pier dpxovros, del Se dvapxov 7) pierd KaKcov dpxovrcov 

5 cruvovcrav; olopueOa 817 TTore rovg roiovrovs Oecopovg rcov 

roLovra)v kolvwvlojv xPV^^^^ "^^ ifje^etv rj eTraiveaecrdai; 

ME. Ucos 8' dv, purjSeTTori ye ISovrag pirjSe avyyevopuevovg 

50 



N0M12N A 639 d 

opOcos yevofjLevo) fjur^Sevl rcov tolovtojv KOLvajvrjfjLarcov ; d 

A0. *'E;^e 817* rojv ttoXXojv koivojvicjv avp^Troras kol 
ovfjLTTOGLa delfjbev av fXiav nva avvovcriav elvai; 

ME. Kat (j(f>68pa ye. 

A0. Tavrrjv ovv fJLCJV 6pdw9 yiyvojjievrjv TJSrj rt? Trcorrore 5 
eOedaaro ; kol G(f)cov fxev aTTOKpivaadai pahiov <hs ouSe- 
TTOiTTore TO irapa/TTav — ov yap €7Ti)((Joptov vyuv rovro ovSe 
vofiLfjLOV — iycb 8e ivrervxi^Kd re TroAAatS' Kal TroXXaxov, Kal 
7Tpo(T€Tt irdaas (hs 'iiros etVetv SL7]pd)rr]Ka, Kal cr;^e86v oXr]v 
fjL€V ovhefxiav opdcos yiyvoixivqv ecopaKa ovSe oLK'qKoa, (xopia e 
8' €t TTOV GfjiLKpd Kal oXlya, rd ttoXXol Se crvfJuravO (hs eiTretv 
Str]fJiaprr)iJi€va . 

KA. riois" 877 ravra, cL $€V€, Aeyet?; etTre ert aacfyeaTepov 
rjpLeXs fJiev yap, oirep €L7T€£j aTTeipia rcbv rotovrcov, ovSe ev- 5 
Tvyxdvovres av Igojs evSvs ye yvolfxev to t€ opOov Kal fxri 64O 
yiyvofJLevov ev avTois. 

A0. Et/cos" Aeyets" aAA' e/xou <j)pdl,ovTOS TTetpco pbavOdveiv. 
TO ixkv yap ev Trdaais re ox>vo8ots', Kal Koivcoviais rrpd^eiov 
(LvTLvcovovVy d)S opdov TTavTaxov eKdoTOLS dpxovTa etvai, 5 
piavddveis ; 

KA. Ylws yap ov; 

A0 . Kat fJLTjv eXeyofxev wvSrj p^axofxevajv d)S dvSpetov Set 
Tov dpxovT elvai. 

KA. Yiois 8' ov; 10 

A0. *0 piTiv dvSpetos Tcjv 8etAcDv vtto (f)6^cx)v rJTTOv 
TeOopv^rjTai. 

KA. Kat TOVTO ovTOjg, D 

A0 . Et 8' rjv TLS fjLrjxoLvr) fJbrjSev to Trapatrav 8e8tdTa pLr^he 
dopv^ovfievov eTncTTTJGaL GTpaTOTreSo) GTpaTiqyoVy dp* ov tovt* 
av Travrt TpoTTCp eirpdTTOfxev; 

KA. Ht(f)6Spa fjL6V ovv. 5 

A0. Nw 8e ye ov GTpaTOTreSov irepl Xeyopuev dp^ovTOs 
ev avSpwv OjLttAtats" ex^pcov exOpols /xera iroXefiov, (jytXajv 8* 

ev eLpTjVT) TVpOS (J>lXoVS KOLVCXJVTJGOVTWV ^iXo^poGvvrjS . 

KA. ^'OpBois. 

A0. "Kgtlv 8e ye rj TOtavTr] GwovGia, e'lirep eWat jLtera C 
fieOrjs, ovK dOopv^os. rj ydp; 

KA. ricus" yap; aAA' ot/xat ttolv TovvavTiov. 
A0. OvKovv TTpajTov fxkv Kal TOVToig dpxovTO? Set; 

51 



640 c nAATI]N02 

5 KA. Tt fJL'qv; ojs ovSevL ye TTpdyfxarL. 

A0. Tlorepov ovv ddopv^ov, el Bvvarov etrj, rov tolovtov 
dpxovra eKiropit^eoSaL Set; 
KA. riaj? yap ov ; 

A0. Kat /xT^v TTepi ye Gvvovatas, (hs eoiKev, avrov (f)p6- 
lo vip-ov etvai Sel' yiyverai yap cf)vXa^ ttjs re VTrapxovcqs 
d (f^iXlas avTOis, Kal en TrAetovo? errLpLeXiqTris ottws earai hid 
TTjv Tore Gvvovaiav . 
KA. ^A\r]6earaTa. 

A0. OvKovv vqcfyovrd re Kal ao<j)6v dpxovra ixeOvovrcov 
5 Set Kadiardvai, Kal pur] rovvavriov ; p.e6v6vTa)v ydp piedvwv 
Kai veo£ dpxojv pLrj (tocos', el p,r] KaKov dTrepydctairo rt /xeya, 
TToXXfj X/Oi^T dv dyaOfj rvxt]- 
KA. na/X77dAAi7 puev ovv. 

A0. OvKOVV el puev yiyvopbivcov cos Bvvarov opOorara 

lo Tovrcov ev rat? TToXeoL rcx)v ovvovaLCJV /xe/x^otro riSt eTTi- 

e KaXcov avrcp rco TTpdypLariy rdx dv opdcos laojs pLepL(f)OLTO' el 

8e dpLapravop^evov (1)9 olov re pidXiara eTnrijhevpLd rt? opcov 

XoLSopet, TTpojrov piev hrjXov djs dyvoeZ rovr* avro yiyvopuevov 

ovK opBcJS, eW on irdv rovrcp rco rpoTTCp (jyavelraL 7TOV7]p6v, 

5 SeGTTorov re Kal dpxovros vqcjyovros x^P^^ rrparropievov. ?) 

ov Gvvvoels rovd\ on pbedvojv Kv^epvtjr'qs Kal irds iravros 

641 dpxcov dvarpeirei Trdvra eXre irXola e'ire dppuara e'lre arpa- 

roTTeSov, eW on ttot' e'lrj ro KV^epvwfievov vtt* avrov ; 

ELA.. YiavraTTaaiv rovro ye dXiqOes eLp7]Ka£, c5 feVe* rovirl 
rcpSe 8' rjpLLV Xeye, ri TTore, dv yiyvrjrai rovro opddq ro 
5 TTepi ros TToaeis vopapiov, dyaOov dv Spdaecev rjpids; olov, o 
vvvSt) eXeyopiev, el Grpdrevpua opOrjs rjyepLOVias rvyxdvoi, 
VLKTj TToXepLOV rols eTTopievois dv yiyvoiro, ov apuKpov dyadov, 
b KaL rdXX ovrco' avpLTTOGLOV Se opdcbs TraiSayajyrjdevros ri 
pieya iSiajrais ^ rfj TroXet yiyvoir dv; 

A0. Tt he; TratSos" evos r^ Kal x^pov rraLZaycoyqdevros 
Kara rpoTTOV evog, re pieya rfj TToXeL </>at/tev dv yiyveadai; rj 
5 rovro ovrcos epojrrjdevreg etVot/xev dv cLs evos puev ^po-X^ '^'t 
rfj TToXec yiyvoir* dv o^eXos, el S* dXcos epcoras Traiheiav rcov 
TTaihevBevroiv ri pieya rrjv ttoXlv ovivquiv, ov ;!^aA€7Tov elnetv 
on TTaihevdevres piev ev yiyvoivr* dv dvBpes ayadoi, yevo- 
C pievoL Se roLovroi rd re dXXa irpdrroiev KaXdJs, en Be Kdv 
VLKCpev rovs TToXeptiovs puaxopievoL. TratSeta puev ovv (pepei 

52 



N0M12N A 641 C 

Kal VLKTjv, VLKTj 8* ivLOT€ aTTaihevGLav' TToAAot yap v^pLcrro' 
repoL Slol TToXe/jLcov viKas yevofxevoL fxvpcajv aAAojj' KaKwv St' 
v^ptv eveirXrjod'qoav y /cat TratScta p.€v oijSeTrwnore yiyovev 5 
Ka8/xeta, vt/cat 8e avOpojirois TToXXal Stj rotaurat yeydvacrtV 
T€ K:at eoovraL. 

KA. Ao/cctS" yjiJLLVy CO 0tAe, ri^i^ ev rot? oti/ots" kolvtjv 
SiarpL^Tjv COS" €tV TratScta? fieydXrjv fioXpav reivovaav Aeyetv, d 
ai/ opdcos yiyvrfTai, 

A0. Tt /XT^v; 

KA. *'E;)(ots' av ow to ptera tout etTretv' to? eariv ro vvv 
clprjfjLevov dX'r]d€g; 5 

A0. To p,€v aXrjOes, co ^eve, Suaxvp^C^crdai ravra ovrcos 
€;\;etv, ttoAAcuv ap,(f)LG^rjTOvvTa>v , dcov' el S' ottt] ifjiol (fyaiverac 
Set Aeyetv, ouSetS" <f)d6vos, eTTeiirep wpfiiJKafjLev ye rovg Xoyovs 
TTepl voficov Kal TroXireias rroielodai ra vvv, 

KA. Tout' auTO S17 TretpcojLte^a, to aot So/cow Trept tcjv 10 
vvv diJL(f>LG^r]ToviJi€va>v Kara/JLadeZv. e 

A0. 'AAAa XPV "^oLelv ovrcos, vfids re iirl to fxadelv /cat 
e^e eTTt ro SrjXojaaL TTeipcofxevov a/xois" ye ttcos", avvrelvai, 
rov Xoyov. Trpcvrov Se /xou a/couaaTe to TOtop'Se. rrjv ttoXlv 
dnavres r)i.Ldjv "EAAi^ves" VTToXapL^dvovoiv co? (fyiXoXoyos re 5 
ecjTt /cat TToAuAoyos", Aa/ceSat/xova Sc /cat KpryTT^v, tt7v /xev 
^paxvXoyoVy rrjV Se rroXvvoLav pidXXov ^ ttoAu Aoytav ao-zcou- 
crap'* GKorrd) Srj jjurj So^av u/xtv Trapctap^co/xat vrept apuKpov 642 
TToAAa Aeyetv, fiedrjs Trepi, upuKpov TTpdyfxaros, Tra/x/xi^/CT^ 
Aoyov dvaKadaipojxevos . ro Se 7y /caTo, (f)VGLV avrov hiopdoj- 
Gis ovK dv hvvairo dvev jjlovglktjs opdorrjros TTore Gacjyes ouSe 
LKavov ev rols Xoyois diroXa^elv , jjlovglktj Se aveu TratSeta? tt^? 5 
TrdGrjs OVK dv av TTore SwatTO* ravra Se TrafXTToXXcov eGrlv 
Xoyojv. Spare ovv ri TTOcajpuev — et ravra fiev eaGaifjiev ev rep 
Trapovri, fiereK^aXp^ev S et? erepov riva vopLOJV rrepi Xoyov. b 

ME. ^Q. $eve ^Adr^vaie, ovk oIgO* Xgcxjs on rvyxdvec 
rjfjLcov Tj eGria rrjs TToXecos ovoa vp,djv irpo^evos. lgojs /xev 
ovv Kal TraGLV rots TraiGiv, eTreiSdv dKovGcoGLV on nvos 
eloLV TToXeojs irpo^evoi, ravrrj ns evvoia e/c vecoi^ evdvs 5 
cvSueTat eKaGrov rjp^ojv rcbv Trpo^evojv rfj iroXei, co? Sevrepa 
OVG7) irarpihi fierd rrjv avrov ttoXlv Kal Srj Kal ifjuol vvv 
ravrov rovro eyyeyovev. aKovwv yap rcov TralSajv evOvs, 
€t Tt p.epL<j)Oivro ri /cat eiraivolev Aa/ceSat/xcjvtot ^ Kdrfvaiovs , c 

53 



642 c riAATONOS 

<I)£ " *H ttoXls vjjlcjv, 60 McytAAe," e^acrav, *' riyuds ov KaXcjs 
7) KaXojs €ppe^€ " — ravra Sr) aKovojv, /cat fjuaxop-^vog TTpos 
avTOL VTTep vjJLoJv aet irpos rovs rrjv ttoXlv els ijjoyov ayovras, 
5 TTOLcrav evvoiav eap^ov, /cat /xot vvv rj re cfxjjvr] TTpoo(j)iXr]5 
VfiojVf TO T€ VTTO TToXXwv Xeyojjievov, cus" OGOL ^AOrjuaicov 
elalv ayadol SLa(f)€p6vTOJS eloiv tolovtol, So/cei dXrjdearara 
XiyeaOai' fxovoi yap avev dvdyKiqs avTO(j)V(x)s , deia jjLOtpa 
, d dXrjdojs /cat ovtl TrXaGTCos etatv dyaOol. Bappwv Sr] epuov ye 
eVe/ca Xeyois dv roaavra ottogo. crot ^iXov. 

KA. Kat p/r]Vy (h ^€ve, /cat rov Trap* ifjLOV Xoyov a/coucras" 

T€ /cat dTToSe^dpievos , Oappcov OTToaa jSouAet Xeye. rfjSe yap 

5 tcrcosT a/cT^/coas" cos" 'ETTt/xevtSr^S" yeyovev ai^T^/o Belos, os rjv rjpilv 

OLKelos, iX9d)V 8e Trpo rdJv liepaLKOJv 8e/ca ereuiv irporepov 

Trap* vfxds Kara rrjv rov deov p^avreuav, Bvaias re idvcraro 

e Ttvas as" o deog dveZXev, /cat 87^ /cat (fyo^ovjJLevojv rov lie pcrcKov 

^ Kdrjvaicov aroXoVy elirev on 8e/ca /xev eTcoi^ ovx tJ^ovglv, orav 

8e eXOojGLV, dTTaXXayT^aovrai Trpd^avres ovhev wv 7JX7nt,oVy 

iradovres re r^ hpdoavres TrXeico /ca/ca. tot ovv i^€Pa)dr]aav 

5 VfjiLV OL TTpoyovoL TjpLiJjVy /Cat €vvoiav CK Toaov eycoye vp.LV /cat 

643 ot r)p.€T€poi €-)(ovaiv yovrjs. 

A0. To, /xev Toivvv vp,€T€pa a/couetv, co? eoiKev, erot/x' av 
eti7* ra 8' e/xa ^ovXecrdac p^ev erot/xa, 8wacr^at 8e ot) Travu 
paSia, opicjs he 7T€cpaT€ov. irpayTOV Srj ovv rrpos tov Xoyov 
c opioojpieda TratSetai^ rt ttot €otIv /cat rtP'a Suvapav t^et* 
8ta yap TavTTjs ^a/xev trcov etvat rov irpoKex^-ipiopiivov iv Tcp 
vvv Xoyov v(f)^ rjp,a>Vy piixp^'Trep dv Trpos tov deov a^t/cr^rat. 
KA. riavu jLtev ovv Spcopiev TavTa, e'lTrep uoi ye r)Sv. 
b A0. AeyovTos Toivvv ep,ov rt ttotc ;^/D')7 (f>avaL 77at8€tav 
elvai, OKe^aode dv dpeoKrj to Xe-)(dev. 
KA. Aeyots" dv. 

A0. Aeyco 817, /cat ^7^/xt rov ortow dya^ov dvSpa /xeA- 
c Aovra eaeodai tovto avTO e/c iraihajv evdvg pieXeTav Selv, 
TTait^ovTa re /cat CTTTOuSa^ovra ev tols tov 7Tpdyp,aTOS eKaaTois 
TTpoGrjKOVGiv. olov TOV pueXXovTa dyadov eoeodaL yecopyov 
rj TLva OLKoSopioVy TOV pbev OLKoSopLOVVTd TL Tcjv TraiSeCojv 
Q oLKoSop.rjp.dTU)v TTait^eiv XPV> ^^^ ^' ^^ yeojpyovvTay /cat 
opyava e/carepo) opLiKpdy tcjv dXrjdiVOJV /xt^T^/xara, irapa- 
GKevdi^eiv tov Tp€(f)ovTa avTcov eKdTepov, /cat 817 /cat twv 
fjLadrjULaTOJv ooa dvayKala 7Tpop,ep.adrjKevaL TrpopidvdaveLV, 

54 



N0Mi2N A 643 c 

OLOv T€Krova fjuerpelv ^ aradfidaOai /cat noXeiJLLKOv 17T7T€V€lv 5 
TTat^ovra ij tl tojv tolovtcov clAAo TTOtciv, Kal TreLpdadat Sta 
Tojv TratStcDv eKCiGe rpeireiv ras ri^ovas Kal iTndvfJLias tcjv 
TralSajv, ol dcfyiKOfjuevovs avrovs Set reXos e;^etv. Ke^aXaiov 
Srj TTaiheias Xeyojjiev rrjv opdrjv rpocjyiqv, tj rod Trat^oi/ros" ttjv d 
^v^xr^v els epcora fjudXiara a^et rovrov 6 Seijaei yevofJLevov 
dvSp^ avTov reXeiov elvai rrjs rod Trpdy/JLaros dperrjs- Spare 
ovv el fiexpt' rovrov ye, oirep elrrov, vpilv dpeaKei ro Xe^dev. 

KA. IldJs yap ov; 5 

A0. M.r) roivvv fJir]S* o Xeyojjuev elvai TratSetW doptarov < 

yevqrai. vvv yap oveihi^ovres eiraivovvres 6 eKdarcov ras 
rpocjydsi Xeyofxev cos rov fxev TTerracSevpuevov rjjjidjv ovra rivd, 
rov Se dTraiSevroVf eviore els re KainqXeias Kal vavKXr^pias e 
fcat dXXojv roLovrcov jjidXa TTeTraiSevfjievwv aoq>iav dvdpojTTOJv 
ov yap ravra rjyovfjLevojv, d)s e.oLK , elvai iraiheiav 6 vvv Xoyos 
dv e'i-q, rrjv 8e rrpos dperrjv eK Traihcov TratSetav, TTOiovaav 
eTTidvfJirjr'qv re Kal epaarrjv rod TToXlrrjv yeveaOai reXeov, 5 
dp^eiv re Kal dpx€Gdai eiTiardfjievov puerd hiKrjS. ravrrjv 
rrjv Tpo(f)rjv d(f)opiadp.evos 6 Xoyos ovros, (1)S ep,ol ^atVerat, 644 
vvv ^ovXoir^ dv jjiovrjv TraiSelav irpoaayopeveiv , rrjv Se els 
XpripLara relvovaav tj nva rrpos lax^^t '^ '<^a,t Trpos dXXqv 
nvd ao(f)iav dvev vov Kal Stfo^s", ^dvavaov r elvai Kal 
aveXevdepov Kal ovk d^iav ro irapdirav iraiheiav KaXeladai, 5 
rjfxeis Srj pLv^hev dvofxan SiacfiepcofMed* avrols, aAA' d vvvSrj 
Xoyos rjp,iv 6pLoXoyr]dels puevero), d)S ol ye opdcos Tverraihev- 
jLteVot Gx^^dv dyadol ylyvovrai, Kal SeX Srj rrjv iraiheiav 
p,rjSapLOV dnpidt^eiv y (hs rrpcorov rd>v KaXXiarcDV rols dpiorois b 
avSpdoiv TTapaytyvopLevov Kal et rrore e^epx^Tai, Svvarov 8' 
earlv erravopdovadai, rovr del hpaareov hid ^iov iravrl Kara 
SvvapLiv. 

KA. ^Opdcos, Kal Gvyxcopovpcev a Xeyeis. 5 

A0. Kat pbrjv rrdXai ye avvexo^p'^crcLpLev d)S dyadwv puev 
ovrcov rcov 8vvap.eva>v dpx^^v avrcov, KaKwv 8e rojv pbiq. 

KA. Aeyets" opdorara. 

A0. Ha(f)eGrepov en roivvv dvaXd^wpuev rovr^ avro on 
TTore Xeyopuev. Kal /xot 8t' elKovos dirohe^aade edv ttcos C 
bvvaros vpiZv yevajpuai SrjXcoaai ro roiovrov. 

KA. Aeye p^ovov. 

A0. OvKovv eva piev rjpudjv eKaarov avrov nOtopLev; 

55 



644 c nAATi2N02 

5 KA. Nat. 

A0. AuO Se K€KTT]fl€VOV iv aVTO) aVJJL^OvXctJ ivaVTLOj T€ 

/cat d(/)pov€, oj TTpoaayopevofiev tjSovtjv Kal XvTrrjv; 
KA. "Ecrrt ravra. 
A0. linos' 3e rovTOLV aiJL<j)olv av So^a? fxeXXovrajVy otv 

lO KOLVOV ixkv OVOfJia iXlTLS, lSlOV §€, (j)6^0S /XeV T^ TTpO XvTTTjS 

d iXTTL^, ddppos he Tj rrpo rov ivavrtov inl he TraGi rovrois 
Aoytcr/xos" on ttot* avrcjv djjLeivov rj x^lpov, os yevofxevos 
hoyfia TToXecos koivov vopuos encovopLaoraL. 

KA. Mdyt? piev 7TCOS e^eVo/xat, Xeye pb-qv to pLerd ravra 

5 (1)9 eTTopLevov. 

ME. Kat ev e/xot purjv ravrov rovro irddos evi. 
A0. Yiepl hj] rovrcjv hiavorjOajpiev ovratoi. davpia puev 
eKaarov rjpidjv rjyrjacopLeda rojv ^(pcov deiov, e'lre d>s Tvaiyviov 
eKeivcxJV e'lre d)S crrrovhfj rcvL GVvearrjKos' ov ydp hrj rovro 

e ye yiyvcoGKOpiev, rohe he tcr/xev, on ravra rd Trddr] ev rjpiLV 
otov vevpa t) Gfxnjpivdoc rives evovoai aTTCoatv re rjpids Kal 
dXXyjXais dvBeXKOVGiv evavriai ovaac eir* evavrias irpd^eis, 
ov hrj hLcopLupLevT] dperrj Kal KaKia Keirai. paa ydp (jirjoiv 6 

5 Xoyos helv rcJov eX^ecov uvveTTopievov del Kal pLrjhapifj dTToXenro- 
pievov eKeivrjs, dvdeXKeiv rols dXXois vevpois eKaorov, ravrrjv 
645 3' eivai rrjv rov Xoyiupiov dyojyrjv XP^^^W '^^^ lepdv, rrjs 
TToXecos KOLVOV vopLOV eTTLKaXovpLevTjv , dXXas he UKXr^pds Kal 
Gihrjpds, rrjv he piaXaKrjv are XP'^^V^ ovaav, rds he dXXas 
TTavroharrols e'iheaLV opuoias. heZv hrj rfj KaXXuarrj dywyfj 

5 rfj rov vopiov del avXXapb^dveiv are ydp rovXoyiapLOV KaXov 
pLev dvros, irpdov he Kal ov ^Laiov, heXadai VTTrjperdJv avrov 
rrjv dyojyrjv, ottcjos av ev rjpLiv ro xpvcrovv yevos vlkS. rd dXXa 

b yevrj. Kal ovrco hrj rrepl davpidnov ojs ovrojv rjpLwv 6 puvdog 
dperrjs aeGOjpievos av eur], Kal ro Kpeirrcx) eavrov Kai rjrrco 
elvai rpoTTOv nvd <f)avep6v av yiyvoiro pbdXXov o voel, /cat 
OTt ttoXlv Kal Ihicjorrjv, rov piev Xoyov dXr]drj Xa^ovra ev 

5 eavrcp irepl rd>v eX^ea)v rovrojv, rovrco eTropuevov heZ ^rjv, 
rroXiv he 7) irapd deojv nvos 7] rrapd rovrov rod yvovros 
ravra Xoyov irapaXa^ovaav ^vopuov depLevrjv, avrfj re opaXelv 
Kal rats dXXats rroXeGLV. ovro) Kal /ca/cta hrj /cat aperrj 

C aa(f)earepov rjpiXv hirjpOpajpLevov dv etTy* evapyearepov h 
avrov yevopievov Kal iraiheia Kal rdXXa eTnrrjhevpLara lgojs 
karai pidXXov Kara(f)avrj , Kal hrj Kal ro Treplrrjs iv roXsolvots 

56 



N0M12N A 645 c 

SLarpL^rj^yO So^aadelr] fxev dv elvac (jyavXov nepu fxrJKOSTToXv 
Xoycov TTepLTTOV elprfpievov , (j)aveir] he rd^ dv loojs rod 5 

pL-QKOVS y* aVTCJOV OVK dnd^LOV. 

KA. Ei; Aeyets', Kal TrepalvcopLev bmrep dv rrjs ye vvv 
SiarpL^rj? d^tov yiyvrjraL. 

A0. Aeye 817 • Trpou^epovres ro) davpLan tovtoj ttjv d 
piedrjv, TTOLOV ri TTore avro direpyat^opieQa ; 

KA. npos" ri he OKOTTOvpievos avro eiravepcoras ; 

AGT. Ovhev TTOJ irpos on, rovro he oAcus' KOivcovrjaav 
rovrcp TTOLOV rt, avpLTTirrrei yiyveodai. en he aa(f)earepov 6 5 
^ovXopiaL TTeipdoopLat (fypdl^etv. epcorca yap ro roiovhe' dpa 
a(f)ohporepas rds rjhovds Kal Xviras /cat dvpLovs Kal epcoras 
Tj Tojv oivwv TTouis eTTireivei ; 

KA. YloXv ye. 

A0. Tt 8' ai) rds alaOiqueis Kal pLvqpLag Kal ho^as Kal e 
<j)povriGeis ; irorepov waavrws O(j)oh pore pas ; r) rrdp^rrav drro- 
XeiireL ravra avrov, dv KaraKoprjs ns rfj pieOrj yiyvrjraL ; 

KA. Nat, TrdpLTTav aTroAetVet. 

A0. OvKovv els ravrov d<^LKvelrai rrjv rrjs ^^XV^ ^^^^ 5 
rfj Tore ore veos rjv irals ; 

KA. Tt pLTiv ; 

A0 . " H KLora hrj ror* dv avros avrov yiyvoiro eyKparrjS . 

KA. "H/ctcxra. 646 

A0. *Ap' ovv TTOVTjporaros, (f)apLev, 6 rocovros ; 

KA. UoXv ye. 

A0. Ov piovov dp* y cos eoiKev, 6 yepcov his Trals yiyvotr* 
dv, dXXd Kal 6 pLeOvodeis. 5 

KA. "Aptcrra etveSf cS ^eve. 

A0. Tovrov hrj rod emrrjhevpiaros ead^ oons Xoyos em- 
X^LprjoeL TTeidetv rjpuds d)s XPV y^^^cr^at /cat pirj ^evyeiv 
rravn adevet Kara ro hvvarov ; 

KA. "Eot/c' eivaf Gv yovv (f)rjs Kal erocpLos rjoOa vvvhrj 10 
Aeyctv. 

A0. ^AXrjdrj pievroi pbvrjpLovevets' Kal vvv y' etyit' b 
erot/xo?, eTTeihrjirep cr(j)d) ye eBeXrjoeiv npodvpiajs ecfyarov 
aKoveiv. 

KA. Ylcjs 8' OVK aKOVGopieOa; Kdv el purjhevos dXXov 
XdpLv, dXXd rov davpiaorov re Kal drorrov, el hel eKovra 5 
TTore dvBpojTTOV els drraaav <j)avX6rr]ra eavTOV epu^dXXeLV. 

57 



646 b nAATi2N0^ 

A0. WvxT]S Aeyets' rj yap; 
KA. Nat'. 

A0. Tt Se; ad)jJLaTOs, co eratpe, els TTOvrjptav, AeTrrd- 
10 T'qra re koL atap^os" kol aSvvafilav, daviidt^oifjiev av et 
C TTore TLS eKOJV eirl to toiovtov a^iKveZrai; 
KA. Y\.u)s yoLp ov ; 

A0. TLovv ; Tovs els to. larpeXa avrovs ^aSl^ovras eirl 
(f>apiJiaK07TOGLa ayvoelv olojJLeOa on p.er^ oXiyov vorepov kol 
^ eirl TToWas rjp^epas e^ovaiv toiovtov to aajfia, otov*el 8ta 
TeXovs €;\;etv p^eXXoiev, t^rjv ovk av he^aivTO ; rj tovs errl to. 
yvpLvdoLa kol ttovovs lovTas ovk Laptev cos dadeveZs els to 
TTapaxpyjP'O. ytyvovTac; 

KA. IldvTa TavTa tcrp,ev. 
10 A0. Kat OTL TTJs /xera raura (h(f)eXias eveKa eKovTes 

TTOpevovTai; 
d KA. KaAAtorra. 

A0. OvKovv XP'^ f<^^^ '^^^ dXXojv errLTrjSevpidTOJV irepi 
hiavoeladaL tov avTov Tpoirov; 
KA. lidvv ye, 
5 A0. Kat TTjs irepl tov olvov dpa hiaT pi^rjs WGavTOJs 
SiavorjTeoVy elirep evi tovto ev tovtols opdcos SiavorjOrjvaL. 
KA. Ua>s 8' ov; 

A0. '"'Av dpa TLvd rjp,Lv d}(f)eXLav exovaa (f)aLvr]Tai p^rjhev 
TTJs TTepl TO crcD/xa eAarrct), ttj ye dpxfj ttjv acop^aGKuav vlkS, 
10 Tip TT^v jLtev jLter* dXyqSovojv elvai, ttjv 8e puij. 
e KA. ^Opdcos Xeyeis, davpidl^OLpL 8' av el tl hwaipueOa 
TOLOVTOV ev avTO) KaTap,adelv. 

AW. iovT avTO or] vvVy cos ^ol^ , rjp.LV rjorj rreipaTeov 
<j)pdt,eLV. Kai jLtot Xeye' hvo <j)6^ojv e'lSr] a^^^ov evavTia 
2 hvvdpieda KaTavoijaau; 
KA. Hota 817; 

A0. To, TOta8e* (f)OpovpLe9a p.ev ttov to, /ca/ca, irpoa- 
hoKchvTes yevrjoeoB ai. 
KA. Nat'. 
10 A0. ^o^ovpieda he ye rroXXdKLs So^av, rjyovp^evoL So^ct- 
^eadai Aca/cot, rrpdTTOVTes r] XeyovTes rt tcov pur] KaXwv ov 
647 8-)] Acat KaXovpuev TOV (l)6Pov 'qpueXs ye, ot/xat 8e /cat irdvTes, 
alGxyvy]V . 

KA. Tt' 8' ou; 

58 



N0M12N A 647 a 

A0. TovTOVs Srj Svo eXeyov ^o^ovs' cov o €T€po<; ivav" 
TLOs fiev rals dXyr]S6aLV /cat rots' dXXoLS cf)6^oLS, evavrios 5 
S earl rats TrXeiaraLs /cat fieyLcrraLs rjSovals. 

KA. ^Opdorara Xiyeis. 

A0. ^Ap* ovv ov Kttl vofjLodeTTjs, Kal Trds ov /cat a/juLKpov 
6(f)€XoSi TOVTOV Tov <f)6^ov €v TLjifj fjLeyLGTr) cTCj^et, /cat KaXcov 
alSojf TO rovTcp ddppos ivavriov dvaiheidv re TrpoGayopevei 10 
/cat fxeyiGTOV KaKov tSta t€ /cat SrjfjLoaLa Trdcn v€v6jjllk€v; b 

KA. ^Opdcos Xeyeis. 

A0 . OvKovv rd r' d'AAa iroXXd /cat jxeydXa 6 (f)6^os rjfJLas 
ovTOs crdj^et, /cat tt)^ ev toj TToXefico VLKrjv Kal Gojrrjpiav ev 
rrpos ev ovhev ovtcds G(f)6Spa rjjjLLV dTrepyd^erac; 8vo yap 5 
ovv earov rd rrjv v'lKiqv dTTepyal^ofxeva, ddppos fxev TToXe- 
jjLLCov, (j)iXo)v 8e (f)6^os alaxvv^S Trepc KaKrjs. 

KA. "Eart ravra. 

A0. "A(f)o^ov TjfjLCJV dpa Set yiyveodaL /cat (f)o^€p6v 
€KaaTov' ojv 8' eKdrepov cVe/ca, SirjpTJjjLeda. C 

KA. riavu jLtev ow. 

A0. Kat /XT^v a</)o^ov ye e/caarov ^ovXrjdevres 7tol€lv 
(f)6^ojv TToXXwv Tivd)v, els (j>6^ov dyovTes avrov fjLerd vo/jlov, 
Toiovrov d7Tepyal,6pLe6a. 5 

KA. Oatvd/xe^a. 

A0. Tt 8' orav €77 LX^i'pdjfJLev nva <f>op€p6v TTOielv fjuerd 
SIktjs ; dp* ovK dvaiG-xyvria avfi^dXXovrag avrov /cat rrpoa- 
yvfivd^ovras VLKav Set TTOielv SiajJLaxofJLevov avrov rat? 
rjbovaZs; t) tt^ fjuev SetAta rr^ ev avrw TTpoapuaxopievov /cat 10 
i^t/ccDyra avrrjv Set reXeov ovrco yiyveaSai Trpos dvBpelav, d 
direipos 8e St^ttou /cat dyvfivaaros d)V rcbv roiovrcov dywvojv 
oariaovv ouS' av tuxlgvs iavrov yevoiro irpos dperijv, acx)(j)- 
pwv Se dpa reXicos ecrrat pLT] iroXXals rjSovals /cat eTndvfxiaLs 
TTporpeTTovGais dvaLGXvvrelv Kal aSt/cetv StajLte/>ta;^7y/xeVos' 5 
/catvevt/CT^/ccos'/xeTaAoyou/cat e/jyou /cat rep^vT^seV re TratStats" 
/cat ei^ crTrouSats", aAA' dTraOrjs cuv Trdvrwv rcov roiovrojv ; 

KA. Ou/coui' rov y' et/cdra Adyoi^ ai' ^X^*" 

A0. Tt ow; (f)6^ov (j)dpfjiaKov eod* OGns Oeos eSco/cev e 
avOpcjjTTOLs, coCTTe OTTOGO) ttXeov dv ideXrj rts" 7tlv€lv avrov, 
roGovrcp fiaXXov avrov voficl^eLV KaB eKdGrrjv ttoglv Svorv^yj 
ytyvea^at, /cat (fyo^elGdat rd napovra Kal rd fieXXovra avrco 
TTavra, /cat reXevrchvra els Trdv Seos" teVat rov dvSpeiorarov 548 

69 



648 a . HAATflNOS 

av9p(x>7T<jJv, iKKOLfirjOevTa 8e /cat rod ncofiaTOs OLTraXXayevra 
ttolXlv iKaarore rov avrov yLyveadai ; 

KA. Kat ri TOiovTOV <j>aZfX€V dv, c3 ieve, iv avSpojirois 
5 yeyovevai Trco/xa; 

A0. OvSev el 8' ow eyevero TTodev, ead on irpos 
dvhpeiav rjv dv vofioderj] ;^p7^crtjLtoi'; olov to roiovSe Trepi 
avTOV Kal ixdXa €LXOfJi€v dv avrw hiaXeyeaOai' Oepe, (L 
vofjLodera, e'ire }^pr](jlv eW* olariaivovv vofiodereLS, rrpaJrov 
b fJ'€V rwv ttoXltwv ap" dv Se^aio ^doavov Svvaros elvau 
Xaf-i^dveiv dvSpelas re Trept Kai SetAtas; 
KA. Oatry TTOV TTas dv SrjXov on. 

A0. TiSe; fJL€T^ da(f)aX€Las Kal dvev KLvSvvcov fjLeydXojv 
5 t) ixerd rd>v evavriojv ; 

KA. Kat Tovro <t6 > fjuerd rijs docjyaXeias avvop,o- 
XoyrjoeL Trds. 

A0. Xpoio 8' dv elg rovs (f)6^ov9 tovtovs dycov Kat 

- iXiyxcov iv tols TradrjfxaGLV, ware dvayKdl,eLV d(j>o^ov yt- 

C yveadai, jrapaKeXevofievos Kal vovOercov Kal TLfiaJv, rov 8e 

dnpid^coVy Sons cot fxr) Treidoiro elvai toiovtos olov ov 

rdrrois iv Trdoiv ; Kal yvjjLvaGdjjievov ficv ev Kal dvSpelcvs 

d^T^/xtov (XTraAAaTTOtS' dv, KaKcbs 8e, ^rjpLLav iTTindeis ; "^ to 

5 TTapdirav ovk dv xpcoo, fjirjSev dXXo iyKaXojv tw TrcofiaTL; 

KA. Kat 7TCOS OVK dv xpcoTOy 60 ieve; 

A0. Tvfivauia yovv, (L ^iXe, Trapd ra vvv OavfjuaGTrj 

paGTCJVTjs dv €L7] Kad^ eva Kal /car' oXiyovs Kal /ca^' ottooovs 

d Tt? aet ^ovXoLTO' Kal €lt€ tls dpa fJLovog iv iprjfjLia, to ttjs 

alGxyvy]S iTTLTTpoGOev TTOLovfxevos, rrplv ev gx^^v rjyovfJLevos 

opdodat pLTj Selv, ovtoj irpos tovs (j)6^ovs yvfivd^oLTO, TrajfJia 

fjiovov dvrl jJLvplcov TTpayixdrajv TrapaGKevat^ofxevos opOcbs dv 

5 TL 7TpdTTOL,eLT€TLS iaVTO) TTLGTeVOJV (f)VG€L Kal fJieXeTTj KaXojs 

7TapeGK€vdGdaL,ixrjhkv okvol fxeTa gvjjl7tot(Jl)v TrAetdvtov yvfx- 
val,6fJL€vos iTnheLKvvGdai ttjv iv ttj tov TTcofjuaTOs dvayKaia 

e Sia(f)opa SvvapLLV VTrepOicov Kal KparaJv, cjGTevTr dox'^' 
fjLOGVVTjs fJLrjSe ev G(f)dXXeGdai jxeya /xt^S* dAAotoucr^at 8t 
dpeTiqVy TTpos Se Tr]v ioxdTTjV ttoglv dTraXXdrTOiro Trpiv 
d<l)LKveZGdaL, ttjv TrdvTCOv rJTTav (f>o^ovjJL€VOS dvdpojTTCOv tov 

5 TTcojJiaTog. 

KA. Nat* GOj(f)povoZ yap <dv>, J) ^eve, Kal 6 tolovtos 

OVTOJ TTpaTTOJV. 

60 



NOMfiN A 649 a 

• A0. UdXiV Br) TTposrovvofjLoOerrjv Xeycxjfxev rdSe' Etei^, 649 
CO voixodera, rod fxev Srj cjyo^ov gx^Bov ovre deos €Scjk€v 
dvdpcoTTOLS TOLOvrov <f)dpiJ,aKov ovre avrol fJLefjbrjxoLViijpieda — 
Tous" ydp yoTjras ovk iv doivrj Aeycu — rrjs 8e d(f)o^Las Kat 
Tov Xiav dappetv /cat aKaipajs <Kal > d {jltj xp"^ TTorepov kariv 5 
TTCofjLa, T) TTcos Xcyofxev ; 

KA. "Eartv, (f)T]G€L 7TOV, TOV olvov <j)pd^a)v , 

A0. ^H /cat rovvavTiov cx^i tovto ra> vvvBrj Xeyofxevcp; 
TTLovra TOV dvdpojTTOV avTOv avrov Trote t Trpcorov tXecov evOvs 
fxdXXov Tj TTporepov, /cat ottogoj dv TrXeov avrov yevr^rai, D 
ToaovTcp TrXetovajv eXTTihcov dyadcbv TrXripovGdai Kat Svva- 
fxecos €ts"Sof av; KalreXevrdjvSr) Trdarjs 6 tolovtos 'Trapprjcnag 
d)£ <JO(f)69 a)V ixeGTOvrai /cat iXevdepiag, Trda'qs Se d(j>o^LaSy 
u)GT€ €L7r€LV TC doKvoj^ OTLOvv, (x)GavTWS Sc /Cat TT/oa^at,* Trds 5 
r^ixlvy otjLtat, ravT* dv avyxojpoZ. 

KA. Tt jJLTJv; 

A0. ' Ava fjLVT] (id CO jjLev S17 roSe, ort Su* c^a/xev tjjjlcov ev 
rats' ijjvxo.ls Setv deparreveadaiy to p,kv ottcos ort /xaAtcrra 
dapprjGOfieVy to be TOVvavTtov otl /xaAtcrra (f)0^rjG6iJL€da. C 

KA. *^A TTJs alSovs eAeye?, cos" olofxeda. 

A0. KaAcDs" fJivr)iJLOV€V€T€. iTretSrj Se tt^v re avSpeiav 
/cat T'J7V d<f)o^Lav iv tols (j)6^ois Set /cara^eAeracr^at, cr/ce- 
7TT€ov dpa TO ivavTLOV iv rots' ivavTioig OepaTreveadai Seov 5 
av etTy. 

KA. To y ovv et/cos". 

A0 . '^ A 7Ta66vT€s dpa 7T€(f)VKaiJL€vSLa(f)€p6vTCOs dappaXioL 
T eLvai /cat dpaaelsy ev tovtols Seov dv, cLs eoiK , eirj to 
jieXeTav cog -j^/cto-ra elvai dvataxy^TOVs re /cat dpaavTTjTos 10 
yefiovTas, (f>o^epovs 8e els' ro rt ToXfxdv eKdaTOTe Xeyeiv d 
17 7Tacr;^€tv 7) /cat Spav alaxpdv otlovv. 
I^KA. "Eot/cev. 

A0. Ou/cow raura eart irdvTa ev ols eafxev tolovtol, 
BvpLo?, epcos, v^pLS, dfxadia, ^tAo/cepSeta, <d >8etAta, /cat ert 5 
rotaSe, TrAowros", /caAAos", Igx^S, Kal rrdvd^ daa 8t rjBovrjs 
av {jLedvdKOVTa 7Tapd<j)pova9 iroieZ; tovtcov 8e evTeXrj re /cat 
acnveoTepav irpajTOv fxev npos to Xap,^dveiv neXpav, etra 
ets' TO jxeXeTav, ttXtjv ttj^ ev otvco ^aadvov /cat 7rat8tas', rtva 
exofxev rjSovrjv etVetv ep^pieTpov /xaAAov, dv /cat oTTCoaTLOvv e 
/Lter evXa^eias yiyvrjTai; GKoncofxevydp 8t]' 8uo/coAoi; ^vx'^js 

61 



649 e nAATl^NOS NOMfiN A 

Kal dypiag, i^ rjg aStACtat fjuvpiai yiyvovrac, TTorepov lovfa 
els Tct oviJL^oXaia nelpav Xapbfidveiv , KivSvvevovra Tvepl 
050 avr(x)V, GcfyaXepcorepov , 7) avyyevop^evov pLerd rrjs rod Alo- 
vvGov deoipias ; 7) rrpos rd^pohioia r)rTr]pi€vr]s nvos ilivx^js 
^doravov Xapu^dveiv , eTTirpeTTOvra avrov Bvyarepas re Kal 
vels Kal yvvauKaSy ovrojs, ev rols (juXrdroLg KivhvvevaavrcL, 

5 Typos' ^v)(rjs OedGaaOai ; Kal pivpia Srj Xeywv ovk dv ris irore 
dvvGeiev oacp hia^ipei rd /xera 77at8ta? riqv dXXcJS dvev 
pLiudov l,7]p.L(x)Sovs decopeZv. Kal Srj Kal rovro puev avrd Trepi 
ye TOVTOJV ovr av iXprjTas ovr aAAovs avupcoTrovs ovoevas 
olopieOa dpL(f)ia^'qTrjaai, p^rj ov Tvelpdv re (xAAt^Acov eTTteiKrj 
ravTTjv elvai, to re rrjs evreXeias Kal du^aXeias Kal rd^ovs 
BLa(f>ep€LV TTpds rds dXXas ^audvovS' 

5 KA. 'AAo^^e? Tovro ye. 

A0. Touro /xev ap' dv rcov xprjcnpLcorarwv ev evr], to 
yvctjvat rds (fyvcreis re Kal e^eis rcov xfjvx^v, ttj rexi^J] eKeivrj 
T]? eanv ravra OepaTreveiv eanv Se ttov, (f)ap,ev, ws otpLaL, 
TToXiriKrjs. '^ ydp; 
10 KA. Yldvv piev ovv. 



62 



BOOK II 

SHORT ANALYSIS 

652 a-664 ^- — Music, if of the right sort, acts as an enchantment, 
to train, and form, and keep alive, right sensations of pleasure and 
pain. 

664 c-667 b 5. — To direct this art aright, and form standards of 
taste, great experience is needed : this implies at least maturity, if 
not old age. Here Dionysus comes to the help of the Muses, and 
adds to age some of the fire and inspiration of youth. This is a 
second use of ixW-q. 

667 b 5-671 a 7. — A disquisition on aesthetic criticism, especi- 
ally (669 b 5 ff.), as applied to music, singing, and dancing. 

671 a to end of book. Details as to the constitution and conduct 
of the chorus of Dionysus : the subject of bodily training is referred 
to, but not discussed. 

B 

A0. To St) fJLera tovto, (Ls €Olk€, GK€7rr€ov eKeZvo Trepl 052 
auTcoi^, rrorepa tovto jjiovov ayadov ^x^i, to /cartSetv ttcos 
kxojJL€V ras (f>vaeis, tj /cat tl fxeyedos (h<f)eXias a^iov ttoXXtjs 
(TTTOvBrjs €V€GT* €V TTJ /Car' opdov XP^^9' '^V^ ^^ olvcp avvov- 
aias. ri ovv hrj Xeyofiev; evead , ws 6 Xoyos €oik€V ^ov- 5 
Aeo-^at ar]piaLV€LV otttj Be /cat ottcjjs, d/coucu/xev TrpocrexovTes 

TOV VOVV, pL-q TTTj 7Tapa7TohiGdojpL€V V7T* aVTOV . D 

KA. Aey' ovv. 

A0 . ^ AvapLvrjadrjvaL roivvv eycoye ttolXlv eTTiOvpLO) ri TTore 
Xiyopev rjp,LV etvai ttjv opdrjv TratSctav. tovtov yap, a)S ^53 
ye eyd) tottci^cd ra vvv, eanv iv rep iTTLTrjdevpLarL rovrco 
KoXihs KaropBovpevcp cwrrjpLa. 

KA. Meya Aeyet?. 

A0. Aeyco roivvv rcov TratScuv TratSt/CT^v etvat Trpcjrrjv 5 
aiodiqaiv tjSovtjv /cat Xvtttjv, /cat iv ols aperr] ^vxfj Kal 

63 



653 a HAATfiNOS 

KaKia TTapayiyverai rrpwroVy raur' elvai, <f)p6prjGLV 8e Acat 
dXrjdels So^as ^e^aiovs evrvx^s orco /cat irpos ro yrjpag 
TTapeyevero' reAeos" S' ovv ear* avdpcjjTTOS ravra /cat ra iv 
b TOvroLs TTavra K€Krrjfji€vos ay add. naiSelav Srj Xeyu) rrjv 
7Tapayiyvo/jL€vr]v irpajrov Tracalv dper'qv' rjSovrj Srj /cat ^tAta 
/cat Xvrrrj /cat /xtcros" av opdcog ev ipv^als iyyiyvcovrai ixtjttoj 
SvvapL€VOJV Xoyo) XafM^dveiv, Xa^ovrwv 8e top Xoyov, (jvjx- 

5 (fxxjvijacocn ro) Xoycp opdcjs et^tcr^at vrro rcov tt pocnf]K6vr ojv 
[e^ctjv], avTT] aS^ rj (TVjjLcfxovLa av/jLTraaa puev dperrfy to he 
TTepi rds rjhovds /cat Auvras* redpapLpiivov avrrjs opdws ware 

C pLicretv pL€v d XP'^ pLioreiv evdvs i^ dpxrjs H'^XP^ reXovs, 
arepyeiv 8e a XP'^ Gripyeiv, tovt* avro dirorepLajv rep Xoyto 
/cat TTaiheiav Trpoaayopevcov , /cara ye rrjv ipurjv opdojs dv 
TTpocrayopevoLS . 

5 KA. Kat ydp, co feve, rjpiZv /cat ra Trporepov opOwg aoi 
TTaiSelas irepi /cat ra vvv elprjadai 8o/cet. 

A0 . KaAcDs" Toivvv. rovTOJV yap Srj rcov opdcos reOpap.- 
pL€vojv TjSovaJv /cat Xvttcov 7rat8et65v oucrcDv x^Xdrai rotg 
avdpci)7TOis /cat hia(j>d ei per ai /cara tt-oAAo, ev rep jSto), deol 
d 8e oiKripavres ro rwv dvOpconaJv erriTTOvov rre(j)VKOs yevo^, 
avaTrauAas" re aurot? rcov Trdvojv erd^avro rds rcov eoprcov 
dpLOL^ds [rots OeoZs ] , /cat Mo Jcras" ' ATrdAAo^va re piovc7r)yerr)v 
/cat Alovvgov Gvveopracrrdg ehouav, Iv^ eTravopdojvraL, rdg 

5 re rpo(j)ds yevop,evag ev rat? eo prats pierd 6ea>v. opdv d 
Xprj rrorepov dXrjOrjs rjpiZv /cara <j)VGiv 6 Xoyos vpLveXrai rd 
vvVy 7] TTOjg. <f)r]alv 8e ro veov dirav ojg erros eiTreXv rois 
re GcopuaGL /cat rat? (f>ajvaXs rjavxioiv dyeiv ov SvvaaOaL, 

e KLveiadai 8e aet 1,'qretv /cat <j)deyyeGdai, rd p,ev aXXopLeva 
/cat CTKiprcovra, olov opxovpieva pbed^ rjSovrjs /cat TrpoGirai- 
^ovra, rd 8e (f)6eyy6p,eva irdaas ^ojvds. rd puev ovv dXXa 
^cpa ovK ^x^-iv auaOrjaiv rojv ev rats" KLvrjaeaiv rd^ecuv ovSe 

5 dra^LOJV, ots 817 pvdpLOS ovopia /cat dppuovua' rjpbXv Se ovs 

654 €L7Top,ev rovsOeovg ovyxopevrds hehooO at yro-urovs elvaiKal 

rovs hehcjKoras rrjv evpvdpLov re /cat evappuoviov aladrjcnv 

pied* TjSovrjSy fl Sii Kiveiv re rjpLag /cat xoprjyeLV rjpicjv rovrovs 

(LSats re /cat d/);^7^crecrtv aAAT^Aot? ovveipovras y ;^opoi>S' re 

5 (hvopuaKevac irapd <r6>rrJ9 x^pds epL(f)vrov ovopia. rrpajrov 
Srj rovro diroSe^copieda; dcopLev 7rat8etav etvat Trpcorrjv Sta 
M.ov(ja)v re /cat 'AttoAAcovos', t] ttws; 

64 



NOMflN B 654 a 

KA. OvTws. 

A0. OvKOvv 6 fiev dTralBevTOS axop^vro^r^iiZv ecrraL^TOv 
Se TTCTTacSevfJievov iKavcos KexopevKora Oereov; b 

KA. Tt fn]v; 

A0. Xopeta ye firjv opxyjcri'S re /cat wStj to gvvoXov 
iariv. 

KA. 'Avay/catov. 5 

A0. *0 KaXcog apa TrcTratSeu/xevos' aSeivre Kal opx^l- 
adai hvvaros av etrj KaXcos. 

KA. *'Eot/c6v. 

A0. "ISojfjLev St) ri ttot' ccrrt to vvv ad Xeyofxevov. 

KA. To TTotov StJ; 10 

A0. " J^aXcljs aSei," (l)afX€v/' Kal KaXojs opx^^Tat** ' tto- 
T€pov " €t /cat /caAa aSet /cat /caAct opx^^^at " rrpoodioixev ^ C 

KA. npoo-^cDjLtev. 

A0. Tt 8' av TO, /caAa re rfyovpievog ctvat, KaXa /cat ra 
accrxpa alaxpa ovrcos aurots" xPV'^^^'f jSeArtov o tolovtos 5 
TTeTTaiSevfjidvos rjfjiiv ecrrat rT7v ;\;opetav re /cat fjuovcrLKrjv ^ 
OS av TO) jjikv croj/xart /cat tt^ (fycovfj to hiavorjdkv elvai KaXov 
iKavLOS v7rrjp€T€lvSvvrj6fj €KdoTOT€,xoi^pj] §€ /XT7 rots* /caAots" 
/xr^Se /xtcTT^ ra firj /caAa, -^ '/cetvo? os" av Tjj fxkv (f)covfj /cat 
TO) GOjfjLaTi fir] rrdvv SvvaTog fj KaTOpOovv f\ 5iavo€iTai, ttj d 
Se rjSovfj /cat Xvtttj KaTopdoZ^Ta fxkv acr7ra^o/xevos",ocra/caAa, 
ra Se hvax^paivojVy oirooa jxr] /caAa; 

KA. IIoAt) to Sta^epov, cS feve, Aeyets" tt^s rratSetas". 

A0. Ou/couv et/xev TO /caAov 0)87^? re /cat dp;\;''?^^^S"7rept 5 
ytyvdjCT/cojLtev Tpels 6vt€s, LOfxev /cat rov TreTratSeu/xevov re 
/cat aTratSeuTov 6p6ojs' et 8e dyvoov}xev ye tovto, ovS et 
Tt? TratSetas" eartv cf)vXaKr] /cat oVou 8taytyvcua/cetv av Trore 
Swalfieda. dp* ovx ovtcos ; C 

KA. OvTCxJ fjLev ovv. 

A0 . Taur' apa jLtera tovO^ rjfJLlv av KaOdnep Kvalv t^veu- 
oucrats" StepevvrjTeov, ax'^P'd re /caAov /cat fxeXog xax' wSrjV 
/cat opxy](JLv et 8eTai;^'7]/xas'8ta^uyovTaot;(')7creTat,/>taTatos' 5 
o /xera Tavd^ rjfxlv Trept iraiheias opdrjs et^* ^EAAi^vt/CTys" etre 
pappapLKTJs Xoyos av etrj. 

KA. Nat'. 

A0. Etev Tt 8e 877 TO /caAov ;(pi7 ^avat <7;^7j/xa ^ fxeXos 

VOL. I 65 F 



654 e nAATf2N02 

lo etvai TTore; <f>€p€f dvSpiKrjs ifjvxyjs ^v ttovois ex^H'^^V^ '^^^ 
655 SetATjs iv TOLS avroLS re Kal 'laois dp' o/xota ra re crxi^f^oLTa 
Kal ra (fydeyfjuara crujU-jSatvet yiyveoBai; 

KA. Kat TTcos", ore ye fJirjSe ra ;)(;p66/xaTa ; 

A0. KaAcDs" y€, c5 iratpe. aAA' ev yap fjLOVGLKfj Kal 

5 ax'^P'OLTCL ixev Kal fJbdXrj eveariVy irepl pvdfjLov Kal apfxoviav 

ov(j7]s TTJs [xovcrLKrjSy ware evpvOpiov fiev Kdl evapfiOGTOVy 

€vxp(J^v S^ jLteAo? ri gxtJI^cl ovk kariv aTreiKaoavra, axTTrep 

ol xopoSLSdcTKaXoL direiKal^ovaLVy opdcos ^BeyyeoOai' to 8e 

rod SetAou re /cat avSpelov Gxrjp^a 7] /xeAos" eariv re, Kal 

b opdojs TTpoaayopeveiv exei ra fxkv ra>v dvSpetcjov /caAa, ra 

rcov SetAcoi^ 8e atcr^pa. /cat tva St^ /xt] jxaKpoXoyia rroXXrj 

ri9 yiyvrjrai rrepl ravO rjfxXv aTravra, aTrAcos" earo) rd /xev 

dperrjs ixofxeva ipvx'i]S ^ adj/xaros", etVe auTTys" etre rtvos" 

5 elKovog, GVfJLTTavra ox'rilJ^o.rd re /cat ju-cAt^ /caAa, to, §€ /ca/ctas" 

au, rovvavriov drrav. 

KA. ^Op6a>9 re TvpoKaXfj Kal ravd^ rjjjLLV ovrcos exeiv 
d7TOK€KpLa6oj rd vvv, 

A0. "Ert S17 ToSe* TTorepov diravres rrdaais p^opetats' 
C o/xotcos" ^atpo/xev, -^ ttoAAoi; Set; 
KA. Tou Trayros" jtxev ouv. 

A0. Tt 770T dv ovv Xeyopiev r 6 TTeTrXavrjKos rj fids etvai; 

TTorepov ov ravrd ian /caAa rjfJiZv Trdaiv, tj rd jxev avrd, 

5 dAA' ov SoKet ravrd elvai; ov yap ttov epel ye rts" co? rrore 

rd rrjg /ca/cta? 7) dperrjs KaXXiova xopevfiara, ouS' cos" auros" 

fiev ;\;atpet rots' tt^S" puoxOrfpias ax'^p^o-OLV, ol 8' aAAot evavria 

ravrrjs pLovurj rivi' Kairoi Xeyovatv ye ol TrXeZaroi /xou- 

d GLKTJg opOorrjra etvai rrjv tjSovtjv rats i/ffxat? Tropi^ovaav 

SvvajjLiv. dXXd rovro fiev ovre dveKrdv ovre daiov rd 

TTapdirav (f)6eyyea6aiy roSe 8e fxaXXov eiKos irXavdv rjjjids. 

KA. To TTOiOV; 

5 A0. ^YiTTeihrnxip^riiiararpoTraiv earl r dire pi rdsx^P^^^^y 
ev TTpd^eoire rravrohaTrals yiyvofxeva /cat rvxo.iS, Kal rjdeai 
Kal pupbifjGeGi Sie^i6vra>v eKaGrcxJV, ots fxev dv Trpds rporrov 
ra pTjdevra ^ jJieXcpSrjdevra -^ /cat oTTOiGovv x^pevdevra, r) 

e Kard (f)VGiv ^ /card e6o9 rj /car* dfji(f)6repa, rovrovs fxev /cat 
rovrois ;)^atpeti/ re Kal eiraivetv avrd /cat TrpoGayopeveiV 
KaXd dvayKaXoVy ots 8' dv rrapd <j)VGiV 7) rpoirov rj nva 
avvT]6eiav, ovre p^atpetv 8wardv ovre erraiveiv acGXpd re 

66 



N0M12N B 655 e 

TTpoaayopeveiv . ols 8' oiv ra fxkv rrjg (f)va€(x)9 op6a avfi- 5 
BaLVT), ra 8e rrjg GwrjOelas ivavrta, 7) ra /xev rrjs crvvrj- 
deias opdd, ra 8e rrjs ^ucreco? ivavria, oStol Se rats rjSovals 
rovs €7Taivovs ivavriovs TTpoaayopevovcnv ' rjhea yap tovtojv 656 
e/cacrra elvai ^acri, TTOvrjpa 8e, /cat ivavriov dXXiov ovs 
OLOvrai (l)pov€lv al(y)(vvovTai pukv Kivelcrdai rep (jojpLari ra 
TOLavra, alaxvvovrai Se aSetv (hs a7ro<j)aiv6pi€voi KaXa fxera 
(TTTOvSrjg, x^LpovGiv 8e Trap^ avrols. 5 

KA. ^Opdorara Xeyeig. 

A0. Mcuv ovv TL ^Xd^rjv ecr^' TJvriva (f)€p€L rep ;)^at/ooi^Tt 
TTOvripias 7) o';(7y/xacrtv 7) p^eXeaiv, rj nv cu^eAtay au rots 
Trpos" rdvavria rds rjSovds arroSexop^evoLS ; 

KA. Et/co? y€. 10 

A0. IIoTcpov ct/co? "^ /cat dvay/catov raurov etvat oirep b 
orav Tt? TTOVTjpoLg yjOeaiV crvvcjv KaKcov dvd pcjiroiv p^rj p^idfj, 
X^^PTJ ^^ d77o8e;)^o/xevo?, 'A^V?? ^^ ^^ ^^ 7rat8tas' /xotpa, ovet- 
pcoTTCxjv avTOV rrju p.oxdrjpLav ; rore 6p,oiovadai StJttov 
dvdyKT^ Tov x^^^povra oTTorepoLS dv x^^PV' ^^^ ^P^ '^^^ eTrat- 5 
velv al(TXVV7]rai' /catrot rod roiovrov ri p.elt,ov dyaOov ri 
KaKov ^at/xev dv -qpiZv Ik Trdarjs dvdyKrjs yiyveadai ; 

KA. AoKO) pL€v ovSev, 

A0 . "Ottov St] v6p,oi KaX<x>s etcrt «:et/xevoi r) Kai ets* tov c 
€7T€LTa xpovov €(jovTai <7T€pl> TTjv 7T€plrds MouCTas" 7rat8etav 
T€ /cat TTaihidv yolopieda e^eoeadaL toZ<s TTOirjTLKOis, oriTrep dv 

aVTOV TOV 7T0Lr]T7]V €V TTJ TTOLT^GeL TepTTT) pvdp.OV Tj pbdXovg 

^ pripbaros exdp-^vov, tovto StSdaKOvra /cat rovs tcov 5 
€Vv6pL(x}v TToihas /cat veovs iv rotS" ;)^opots', ort dv tvxX) 
dTT€pydt,€Gd ai irpos dperrfV r) pioxOr]piCLV ; 

KA. OvTOL 877 TOVTO ye Xoyov ex^c ttcos ydp dv, 

A0. Nw 8e ye avro cos" eTTO? elireXv iv irdaais rats d 
TrdAeCTtv €^€GTi Spdv, ttXtjv /car AtyuTrrov. 

KA. 'Ev AlyvTTTcp Se Srj ttcjs to toiovtov (f>f)s vevopuode- 
TTJadai ; 

A0. 0ai?/xa /cat dfcovCTat. TrdAat yd/D 87^7roT€, cojeot/cei^, 5 
eyvojadr] Trap* avTols ovtos 6 Aoyos" ov Ta vvv XiyopbevrjpLeis, 
ort KaXd p.€V ax'^P'OLTa, /caAd 8e /xcAt^ 8et pi€Taxeipit,eGdai 
TaZs ovvrjdeiaLS tovs iv Tats ttoXcglv veovs' Ta^dp^evot he 
raura, drra ecrrt /cat onot drra a7T€<f)r)vav iv rots' lepols, 
/cat TTapd rauT* ov/c i^rjv ovTe t,cx)ypd(j)OLS, ovt^ dXXois ogol e 

67 



656 e nAATfiN02 

GX'qfiara Kal 6|xoi(x>{jLaTa a7Tepyat,ovTaiy fcatvoro/xctv ot)8* 
eTTivoelv aAA arra tj ra Trar/jta, ovhk vvv e^eanv, ovre iv 
TOvroL£ ovre iv ^ovaiKfj avfJUTTacrr). gkottcov Se evpijoreLS 
5 avTodi ra fivpLOGTOv eros yeypapufieva t] rervTTCOfJLeva — ov^ 
cos €TTOs €l7T€LV fjLvpiOGTovaXX ovTCOs — TcovvvvhehrjjXiovpyr]' 
657 i^ivcjov ovre rt KaWLova ovr atcrp^tco, <Kara> rrjv avrrjv 8e 
T€-)(yTiv aTreipyaaixeva. 

KA. (davixacjTov Aeyets". 

A0. NofModcTLKOV fieV OVVKalTToXlTLKOVVTTep^aXXoVTWS. 

5 aAA erepa cpavA av evpots avroui' rovro o ovv to irepi 
fjiOVcriKr^v aXrjdes re /cat a^Lov ivvoiag, on Bvvarov ap* rjv 
TTeplrojv TOiovrcjvvoixodeTeZadai <KaL> jSe^atco? Ka9i€pouv 
Ta fjieXrj ra rrjv opOoTrira (f)VG€i rrapexop'^va. rovro Se Beov 
ri Oeiovrivos avSposav eir] , KaOdrrep eKcZ <l>aaLV ra rov ttoXvv 

b rovrov Geacufxeva xpovov /xeXr) rrjs "IglSos TTOLrjfjiara yeyove-- 
vaL, (LcrO^ y OTTep eXeyov, et Svvairo rLs iXetv avrwv Kal 
oTTCxxjovv rrjv opOorrfray dappovvra xpi] eis vofiov ayeiv Kal 
rd^iv avrd' d)9 rj rrjg rjSovrjs Kal Xvtttjs f T^ri^crt? tou Kacvfj 

5 ^rjreZv del fiovGLKfj xp'^^^Gai ax^Sovov fjLeydXrjv rivd Swa/xti^ 
€X€i TTpos ro hiatjideZpai rrjv KaOLepcodetaav ;)(o/)etav €7n- 
KaXovGa dpxci-i'6rr]ra. rrjv yovv eKet ovSafjiOJS eoiKe Svvarrj 
yeyovevai hia^OelpaLy irdv Se rovvavriov, 

C KA. OatVerat ovr cog av ravra ex^tv ck tCjv vtto gov ra 
vvv XexOivrcov. 

A0 . ^A/a' ovv Sappovvres Xeyofxev rr)V rfj jxovGLKfjKaL rfj 
TiatSta fjLerd xopeias ;;^p€tav 6p6r)V etvai roiwSe rivi rpoiTCp; 

5 ;^at/[)o/xev orav olwfjLeda €v TrpdrreiVy /cat oirorav ;!(at/3a)/xev, 
olopeOa €v 7Tpdrr€Lv av ; pbcov ovx ovrcx)5 ; 
KA. Ovro) fxev ovv. 

A0. Kat pbTjv €v ye ro) roiovro), x^^^povres, '^gvx^clv ov 
Svvdfieda dyeiv, 
10 KA. "Eart ravra. 

d A0. '^Ap^ ovvovx'TjfJiojvol fxevveoiavrolxopeveLv eroLfioiy 
roSerojVTTpeG^vrepwv rjfjLwveKelvovs av Oewpovvres hidyeiv 
rjyovfjbeOa TTpeirovrcDs, x^^P^^'^^^ "^d ^^^^^^^^ TratSta re /cat 
eoprdoeiy eTreLSr] ro Trap' rjp,tv rjjJids eXa<f)p6v e/cAetVet vvVy o 

5 TTodovvres KaldoTTal^oiievoirideixev ovrcjsaycovas rolsSvva- 
{xevoLs Tjfjidg on fidXiGr^ els Tr]v veorrjra iJLvr)p,'r] eireyeipeiv ; 

. - KA. 'AXrjOeGrara. w 

68 



NOMftN B 657 d 

A0. McDv ovv olofxeda /cat KOfiLSfj fJLarrjv rov vvvXeyo- 
fi€Vov Xoyov Trept rojv iopra^ovTcov Xeyeiv rovs ttoXXovs, otl e 
Tovrov Set aocfxxjrarov rjyeLuOaL Kai Kpiveiv vlkolv, os av 
rffjids evcjipaiveoO ai /cat ■)(aipeiv on /xaAtcrra a7T€pyat,r]Tai; 
Set yap 817, eVetTre/o a^eip^eOd ye Trat^etv eV roZs tolovtols, 
Tov TrXe LGTOVs KalfidXiara )(^aLp€tV7roiovvTa,rovTOV fxaXtara 5 
TLpidadai re, /cat oirep elirov vvvhrj, rd viKrjrrjpLa (j)ep€LV. 
dp* ovK opdcjs Xeyerai re rovro /cat irpdrroLT dv, et ravrrj 658 
ytyvotro; 

KA. Tdx* dv. 

A0. 'AAA', cS /xa/capte, /zt) Ta;\;u to tolovtov Kpivojfxev, 
dXXd hiaipovvT€S avro Kard fxepr] oKOTrcLp^eSa roicohe tlvl 5 
rpoTTCp' Tt av,€t TTore Tts" ovtojs dirXchs dycova deir) ovtlvovv, 
/Ltr^Sev d(f)opi(jas pn^re yvpLVLKov /xi^re pLOvaiKov p^ajd lttttlkov, 
dXXd Trdvras avvayayojv rovs iv rfj TToAet 77poet7rot, ^ct? 
VLKTjTTJpLa, TOV ^ovX6fi€vov 7Jk€LV dycjjvLOvpL€VOV rjSovrjs rrepi 
pLOVOV, OS [S' ] dv T€pi/jr^ Tovs Beards /xaAtcrra, p.rjSev emTar- b 
Topbevos (pTLVL rpoTTcpy VLKrjar] Se avro rovro ort p^aXiara 
aTTepyacrdpLevos /cat Kpidfj rcov dyajViGap^evojvyjSicrros yeyo- 
vevaL — Tt ttot' ai^ rjyovpLeda e/c ravrrjs rrjs Trpopprjaeajs 
avpLpalveiv; 5 

KA. Tou 7T€/3t Xeyeis ; 

A0. Et/cd? 770U TOV /xeV Ttva eTTiheiKVOvat, KaOdirep 
Opbrjpos, pai/jwSiaVy dXXov Se Kidapcvhiav, rov Se riva Tpa- 
ycphiavy rov S' av Kcjpuphiavj ov davpuaarov Se et ris /cat 
davpuara eTTiSeiKvvs pidXiar^ dv viKav rjyoZro' rovrcov Srj c 
roLOvrojv /cat erepwv dycovLcrcov puvpicDV eXdovrcov e^opiev 
eiTreZv ris dv vlkco St/catai?; 

KA . "Atottov 'r^pov ' ris ydp dv aTTOKpivoiro aoL rovro ws 
yvoifs dv vore irplv [d/couCTat Te] /cat rcjv ddX7jrd)V eKdcjrcov 5 
avr-qKoos avros yeveadai; 

A0. Tt ovv h-q; ^ovXecrde eyoj a<j>a>v rrjv drorrov airo- 
KpiGLV ravrrjv ciTro/cptVaj/xat; 

KA. Tt puT^v; 

A0. Et pLev roLVVv rd Trdvv upLLKpd KpivoL TratSta, /cpt- 10 
vovGLV rov rd davpuara eTnSetKvvvra' rj ydp; 

KA. Hdjs ydp ov; d 

A0. 'Eav Se y' ot pueil^ovs TralSes, rov rds KajpLcoStas' 
rpaycphiav Se at Te TreTratSeu/xevat rojv yvvaiKajv /cat Ta vea 

69 



658 d nAAT-QNOS 

fieLpOLKLa Kau ax€h6v luojs to ttXtjOos ttolvtcov. 
5 KA. "laojs Srjra. 

AS. ^Paifjcphov Be, /caAco? 'lAtaSa /cat 'OSvacretav rj n 
TCJV *Ho"toSetct>vStaTt^€P'Ta,TCi;)^' av rjixeZs olyepovresrjBiara 
aKOVoavres viKav av <f)aZfji€V Tra/XTroAu. tls ovv opdcos civ 



10 



vevLKTjKCJS €Lr], Tovro jjLera tovto' fj yap 
KA. Nat. 



e A0. AijXov (I)s epuoLye /cat v/jllv avayKaZov eariv (jxivai 
Tovs VTTO Tcov rjjji€Tepojv rjXLKLOJTWv Kpidivras opdojs civ 
viKav. TO yap edos rjpiZv rcbv vvv Srj TrdjjLTToXv 80/cet rcov 
€V raZs TToXeaiv a.TracratS' /cat Travra^^ov ^iXrLorov yiyveadai, 

5 KA. Tt piTjV ; 

A© . TiVyxojpoj Sr] ro ye togovtov /cat iyoj toZs ttoXXoZs, 
SeZv rrjv fJLOvaiKrjv rjSovfj Kpiveadai, fxrj fjuevroL tcov ye eTTiTV' 
XovTOJVy aAAa axeSov eKeiviqv elvai jxovoav KaXXloTr^v t^tls 
TOVS ^eXT Lot ovs Kal LKava)S7Te7TaLSevfM€vovsTepTreL, /xaAtcrra 
659 Be rjTLS eva tov dpeTrj re /cat TiatSeta BLa(f)epovTa' Bid raura 
Be dpeTrjS <j)apiev BeZadai tovs tovtcov KpiTas, otl ttjs t€ 
dXXrjs jJieToxovs avTOVs elvai Set (l>povT^aeojs /cat Btj /cat ttjs 
dvBpeias. ovT€ ydp irapd dedTpov Set tov ye dXrjdrj KpLTTjV 

5 Kpiveiv (xavddvovTa, /cat iK7rXr)TT6p,evov vtto dopv^ov toov 
TToXXcbv /cat TTJs avTOV dTTaiBevaias ,ovT^ av yiyvcjGKOVTa St 
dvavBpiav /cat SetAtav e/c TavTov CTro/xaros" ovirep tovs deovs 

b eTTeKaXeaaTO fjieXXajv Kpiveiv, eK tovtov i/jevBofJievov drrocfyaL- 
veadai paBvixojSTr^v Kpiaiv ov ydp piaBriTris dXXdBLBdcTKoXos , 
cos ye TO BiKacov, deaTcov jjidXXov 6 KpiTrjs /ca^t^et, /cat evav- 

TLOJGOIXeVOS TOZS TTjV r)BoV7]V jJLTj TTpOGT^KOVTCOS fJiTjBe 6p6d)S 

5 (XTToStSovcrt deaTaZs' [^|"7^v ydp Brj tco TraXaicp re /cat 'EAA?^- 
VLKO) vo/xo),] Kaddnep 6 St/ceAt/cos" re /cat 'IraAt/cos" vopuos 
vvv, TO) TrXrjdeL tcov OeaTcov eTTiTpeTTCov /cat tov viKCovTa 
BiaKpLvojv x^ipoToviais, Bie(f)6apKe fxev tovs TTOirjTds avTOVs 

C — Trpos ydp TTjv TCOV KpLTcov TjBovTjv TTOiovdiv ovoav <f)avXrjv, 
coGTe avToX avTOvs ol BeaTal TraiBevovaiv — Bie^OapKev B 
avTov TOV OedTpov ras" r^Bovds' Beov ydp avTOVs del ^eArto) 
Tojv avTCov Tjdcov dKovovTas ^eXTLCx) TTjV rjBovrjv lax^^v, vvv 

5 aVToZs BpCOGLV TTaV TOVVaVTLOV OrVfJL^alveL. TITTOT ovv 7]fJLLV 

TO. vvv av BiarrepavBevTa tco Xoycp arjjJiaiveLV ^ovXeTai; 
GKOTTeZaB^ el rdSe. 
KA. To TToZov ; 

70 



N0M12N B 659 c 

A0. Ao/cet fioL rpLTov 7) rdraprov 6 Xoyos et? ravrov 
TT€pL^ep6yi,evos riKeiv, ojs oipa rraidela {xev iaO^ rj TraihcDV d 
oXkiti t€ /cat aycjjyri irpos rov vtto tov vojjlov Xoyov 6p66v ^Iprj - 
fjLei'ov, /cat rots eTTieLKeardrois /cat TTpeo^vrdroLS 3t e/x- 
TTeipiav avvSeSoypbdvov cos ovtojs opdos eanv tV ovv rj iJj^XV 
rov 7rat8o.9 fJ^rj evavria ^aipeLV /cat XvireladaL idi^rjraL rw 5 
vofjia) /cat rots' vtto tov voyLOV TreTretcr/xeVots", aAAa avveTrrjTaL 
XOLLpovGO. re /cat Xvirovfjievrj rots' aurots rovrois olajrep 6 
ydpcov, rovrcov eVe/ca, as" coSds KaXovjjLev, ovrcos p^ev iircpSai e 
rats' ipv^ats avrai vvv yeyovevaiy irpos rrjv roLavrrjv rjv 
Xeyopicv Gvpi(f>ajviav eo'TTOL'Sao'/xeVat, Sta 8e ro arrovSrjv pLT] 
Svvaadai (fjdpetv ras rwv viojv j/fup^as", TratStat re /cat whal 
KaXelodai /cat TrpdrreaOai, Kaddirep rols Kdpivovaiv re /cat 5 
dudevojs loxovcFLv rd (jajpuara ev rjSeat rialv uinois /cat 
7T(x)ixaaLrrju xp^f^TTjV TTeipiJJvrairpo^7]v TTpo(j(j>epeLV olsfJieXeL 660 
rourcov, rrjv Se rojv irovr^pchv ev drjSeGiv, Iva rrjv fjuev aarra- 
^ojvraL, rrjv Se pLiaelv opOcJS edi^covrai. ravrov Srj /cat rov 
TTOLTjrcKov 6 opdos vopLoderr]£ ev rots /caAots" prjpLaGL /cat 
eTratverotS" Treiaei re, /cat dvay/cao€t /xt^ ireldcov, rd rojv 5 
acD(j)p6v(jJv re /cat avSpeicov /cat Trdvrcos dyadaJv dvSpwv ev 
re pvdp^OLS GX'^P'OLTa /cat ev appLoviatGiv pLeXrj TTOLOvvraopBcos 
TTOieZv. 

KA. Nvv ovv ovrco Sokovglv gol, irpos Atds", c5 ^eVe, ev b 
rats' aAAats' iroXeai iroieZv ; eyoj puev yap /ca^' ogov alada- 
vofiai, ttXtjv rrap^ rjiJLLV 7] Trapd Aa/ceSat/xovtots", a crv vvv 
XeyeLS ovk otSa irparropieva, Kaivd he drra del yiyvopLeva 
TTepi re rds op-)(r](Jeis Kal irepl rrjv dXXrjv {lovcrLKrjv (JvpLiraGav , 5 
ov)( VTTO vojxojv puera^aXXofieva aAA' vtto rivojv drdKrcov 
'qSovdJVjTToXXovSeovacovrcovavrojvelvai /cat/cara rai;ra,a>s' 
GV /car AuyvTTTOv d(f)epiJLrjveveLS, aAA' ovSenore rojv avrojv, C 

A0 . "Apiard y', co KAetj^ta. el 8* eSo^d gol a gv Xeyeis 
Xeyeiv ojs vvv ycyvopueva, ovk dv 6avjjLdl,oiiJLL el purj Ga^cos 
Xeycov a Stap'oou/xat rovro erroirjGa /cat eTTadov dXX a 
^ovXopLai yiyveGdai TTepi jjlovglktjv, rotaur' arra ecTTOV lgojs 5 
ojGre Gol So^at ravra ifie Xeyeiv. XoiSopetv yap Trpdyjiara 
aviara /cat TToppoj TTpo^e^rjKora apbaprlas ovbafjucjjs rj^v, 
avayKalov 8' eviore e'crrtv. eTreihrj 8e ravra GVvSoKel /cat d 
oot, ^epe, <l>fjs Trap* vjjllv /cat roLG^e jiaXXov tj Trapd rols 
dXXoLS "EiXXrjGLV yiyveGdai rd rocavra; 

71 



66o d nAAT12N02 

KA. Tt /xTyv; 

5 A0. Tih^ el KalTTaparoZs aXXoLsyiyvoid^ ovTOJ ;7TOTepov 
avTCL KaXXiovojs ovtojs etvat (fyatfjiev av -^ Kaddnep vvv 
yiyverai yiyvofjieva; 

KA. IloAi; TTOV TO BLa(f>€pov, el Kaddirep irapd re roZuhe 
/cat Trap' rililv, /cat en KaOdnep elnes ov vvvhri heiv elvai, 
lo yiyvoLTO. 

A0 . Oe/3€ 817, avvofxoXoyrjcrcoiJLeOa to. vvv. dXXo rt Trap' 

e Vfjilv ev Trdcrrj 7rat8eta /cat pLovcriKfj rd XeyojJievd euri raSe; 
Tovg TTOir^rds dvayKa^ere Xeyeiv cLs o fxev dyados avqp 
aa)<f>pcjv cov /cat St/catos" evhaipaov earl /cat jJLaKdpios, eav re 
fjLeyas /cat lax^pos edv re puKpds /cat daOevrjs fj, /cat eav 

5 TrXovTTJ /cat fjbi]' edv 8e apa TrXovrfj [lev K.LVvpa re /cat MtSa 
jjLaXXov, fj 8e a8t/cos, a^Atds' r' eVrt /cat dviapcos Ifj' Kai 
** Out' dv fjLvr]GaliJir]v," (l)rj(jLVVfJLLv67roLr]Trjs, e'lnep 6p6a)9 
eyei, ovr ev Aoyco avopa ritleLiJLrjv, os p^r] Travra ra 
Xeyopieva KaXd puerd BiKaioavvqs TTpdrrot /cat ktcoto, /cat 87) 
661 "KalSrjta)v"TOLOVTOsajv"6peyoLro eyyvOev lardpievos," 
dSiKos Se wv pLTJre roXpLcp " opcov (jiovov alpLaroevra ' pLTjre 
viKO) deojv" QprjLKLOv BopeT^v," pLTjre dXXo avrw pLrjSev rojv 
Xeyopievcov dyaSayv yiyvono TTore. rd ydp vno rcov ttoXXojv 

5 AeydjLtcv' dy a^a ovk dpdcnsXeyerai. Xeyerai ydp ws dpLorov 
pLev vyiaiveLV, Sevrepov 8e /caAAos", rplrov 8e ttXovtos, pivpia 
Se dXXa dyadd Xeyerai' /cat yap o^v opdv /cat dKOV'eiv /cat 

b Trdvra 6<ja e^^^erai rcov aladrjoeajv evaLGdrjrojs exeiv, en he 
/cat rd TTOieZv rvpavvovvra on dv eTTidvpifj, /cat ro 8rj reXos 
dTrdarjg pLaKaptoriQros elvai ro rrdvra ravra KeKrrjpievov a- 
ddvarov elvai yeuopLevov on Ta;(tcrTa. vpLeZs he /cat eyo) 

5 7TOV rdhe XeyopLeVy d)S ravrd ean avpLTravra 8t/catots" piev 
/cat oGiOLS dvhpdoLV dpiora Kr'qpuara, a8t/cots' he /ca/ctcrra 
GvpiTTavra, dp^dpueva (xtto t-^s" uytetas" /cat hrj Kac ro opdv 

C /cat TO dKoveiv /cat aladdveadai /cat to rrapdirav l,rjv pLeyiarov 
p,ev /ca/cdv rdv avpLiravra xpdvov dddvarov dvra Kai KeKrrj- 
pLevov Trdvra rd Xeyopieva dyadd ttXtjv hiKaLoavvrjg re Kat 
dperrjs dTrdarjg, eXarrov he, dv ws oXlyiCFrov o rocovros 

5 ;^pdj/ov cTTi^cov f). ravra hrj Aeyetv, ot/xat, tous" Trap vpilv 
TTOirjrdsy aTTep eydj,7reiaere /cat avay/caoeTe, /cat CTt TOi^rots" 
eiTopLevovs pvdpLovs re Kai appbovias aTTohthovras rraiheveLV 
ovroj rovs veovs r)pLdjv. tj ydp; Spare' eyw puev ydp Xeyoj 

72 



NOMfiN B 66l d 

aa^cjs TO. fJL€V KaKa Xcyofxeva dyaOa rots aStACot? etvaif d 
rols Se St/catots" KaKa, ra 8' dyada tols fjuev dyadols ovtojs 
dyadd, rocs Se KaKolg KaKa- onep ovv rqpofxrjv, dpa (Tvyi<j>o)- 
vovjjLev iyo) re Kal vfjLets, t) ttws ; 

KA. Ta fjuev €fxoLy€ (f)aiv6iJL€6d ttws, tol 8* ovSafxaJg. 5 
A0. *A|0* ovv vyUtdv re KeKrrjfievov Kal ttXovtov Kal 
Tvpavviha hid reAous", Kal en TrpoGridrjiii vfitv lax^v 8ta- 
^ipovaav Kal dvhpeiav /xer' ddavauias /cat fJirjSev dXXo avrcp e 
Tcov Xeyofievcjv KaKOJV elvai yiyvopievov, d8t/ctav8e Kal v^piv 
exovra iv avrcb pLovoVy rov ovno ^covra taco^ vpids ov ireiOa) 
{JLTj ovK dpa evhaipLova dAA' ddXiov yiyvcaSai (ja<f)6js; 

KA. ^ KX'qdearara Aeyets". 5 

A0. Et€i'* Tt ovv TO pLerd rovr^ elrreZv rapids xp^^^i 
dvSpeto^ yap Srj Kal LGX^pos Kal /caAo? Kal ttXovcjlos, Kal 
TTOLcov OTLTTep iindvpLOL Tov ^Lov aTTavTa, ovx vpLLV 80/cet, 662 
€L7T€p dSuKos €17] Kal v^pLGTrjg, €^ dvdyKTjs alaxpdjs dv ^ijv; 
rj TOVTO pL€V tcjcus" dv uvyxcoptjcTCLt'Te y TO y€ alaxpdjs i 

KA. YidvV pL€V OVV. 

A0. Tt be; TO Kal /ca/ccDs"; 5 

KA. OvK dv €TL TOvd* 6pL0La>£. 

A0. Tt 8e; TO Kal drjScos Kal purj avpL(j)€p6vTO)s avTcp; 

KA. Kat TTCJS dv TavTa y* ert avyxo^po tpiev; 

A0. "Ottcjs; et deog rjpiZv, (hs €0lk€v, co (fyiXoi, Solr) tls b 
uvpL^a>VLav, ojg vvv ye cr;\;e86v dndhopev cxtt' dXXTJXa>v. epLol 
yap 8-q (^atWrat raura ovtws dvayKaZa, d)9 ovSe^ c5 ^tAe 
KAetvta, K.pTjTT) vrjoros aa^ajs" Kal vop.o6eTrjs tuv TavTTj 
TTeipcppL-qv dv rous" Te rroiriTds dvayKdl,eiv <f)6eyyeG6ai Kal 5 
navTas tovs ev ttj TroXei, l^rjpLLav Te oXiyov pLeytGTrjv eTTLTi- 
delrjv dv, et tls ev ttJ xoipa (f)dey^aLTO ws elcriv TLves dvdpw- 
7TOL TTOTe TTOVTjpoL pLev , rjSeo)? Se l,djVTe9, ^ XvdLTeXovvTa C 
puev dXXa cgtI Kal KepSaXea, SiKauoTepa Se dXXa, Kal ttoAA' 
aTT dv irapd rd vvv Xeyopieva vtto Te KpT^rcDv Kal AaKe- 
haipiOVLcov , (hs eoLKe, Kal Stjttov Kal tojv dXXojv dvdpojTTWV, 
8td(^opa TTeidoipL* dv tovs iroXiTas /xot t^deyyeadai. (f>ep€ 5 
yap, at TTpos Atd? re /cat 'A7rdAAct)i'os',c5 dpiGTOi Tcbv dvhpcov , 
ei TovsvopLodeTTjaavTasvpLivavTovs tovtovs epoipieOa deovs* 

Ap ooLKaLOTaToseaTtvpLOS'r)OL(jTOS,7] OV eoTov Tive pico, u 
OLv o pLev -^Slgtos d)v TvyxdveiySiKaioTaTos 8' eTepos;' elSrj 
Svo ^at€v, epotpLed* dv lgcos avTOvs irdXiv, eiirep opdws 

73 



662 d nAATfiN02 

eTTavepcoTcpfJiev' " HorepovsheevSaLjjLovecrTepovsxPV ^^y^^^t 

5 Tovs Tov SiKaLorarovT] rovs rov T^hiarovhia^LovvTas ^iov ;" 
el fJU€P Srj (jyaZev rovs tov TJSiarov, cLtottos avrwv 6 Xoyos 
dv yiyvoLTo. ^oyXofxai Sc /jlol fxr] €7Tt deojv Xiyeodai to 

e TOLOVTOV, aXX eiTL TTarepojv Kal vojioderwv iJbdXXov, /cat fxot 
rd efjLTTpoaOev '^pcoTrjjjLeva narepa re Kal voixoOeTrjv rjpojTri- 
aOcxjy 6 8 eiTTeTOJcLs 6 1,6jv tov 7JSl<jtov ^lov iarlv fxaKapLcora- 
ros" €LTa fxeTOi Tavra eyojy dv <j)aLrjv' " ^Q. Trarep, ov^ o)S 

5 evSaifiovedTard fie i^ovXov i^rjv; aAA' aet Sta/ceAefo/xevos" 
ovSev inavov l,rjv /xe ws SiKacorara." TavTj] pLev ovv 6 
Tid€pL€VOS€LT€ vopboderrjs eire Kal iraTri par ottos dv ot/xat/cat 
aTTopos (f)aLVOLTO rod Gvpi<j)(x>vovvTO)s eavTcp Xeyeiv el 8' av 
TOV hiKaiorarov evhaipLOveaTarov d7TO(f>aivoLTO ^iov elvat, 
lo t,y}TOL 7TOV nds dv 6 aKovcoVj ot/xat, tl ttot iv avrw to ttjs 
663 rjhovrjs KpeiTTOV dyadov re Kal KaXov 6 vopLOs ivov erraivel. 
TL yap Srj hiKaicp 'x^cji>pit,6pievov 'qSovrjs dyadov dv ylyvoiro; 
(f)€p6y KXeos re Kal eiraivos rrpos dvdpcoTTOJV re Kal decjv dp* 
€(jtIv dyadov fJLev Kal KaXoVydrjSes 3e, Sucr/cAeta Se TdvavTia; 

5 r)KiGTa, (h (fyiXe vopiodeta, (fyijaopiev. aAAd to fjbrjre nvd 
dbiKeXv pbTjre vtto tlvos dhiKeladai fxdjv dr^Ses jLteV, dyadov Se 
7j KaXov, ra S eTepa 7^8ea /xeV, ala^pd 8e Kal /ca/ca; 
KA. Kat TTcjs; 
A0 . OvKovv 6 pb€V puTj ^wpi^cDV Xoyos rjSv re Kal SiKaiov 

b [Kal dyaOov re Kal KaXov] jndavos y', elpbrjSev €T€pov, rrpos 
TO TLva ideXeiv l^rjv tov daiov Kal StKaiov ^tov, (Lorre vopuo- 
OeTTj ye aiaxi^crTOs Xoyojv Kal evavTicjTaros ds dv fir) (jifj 
Tavra ovrcos €;)^etv ovhels yap dv eKd>v ideXoi Treideudai 

5 rrpdrreiv rovro dray fjurj ro xaipetv rod XvireZaOai irXeov 
hirer ai. aKorohiviav Se ro noppojdev opcofjievov rrdaiv re cos 
enos elirelv Kal Stj Kal roXs iraial Tiapep^et, vopioderrjs 
b' olfxai So^av els rovvavriov rovrov KaraGrrjueL, ro OKoros 

C d(f)eXa)V, Kal Trelaei dfjucos ye ttcos edeai Kal eiraivoLS Kat 
XoyoLS OJS eGKLaypa(f)7jpieva rd hiKaid eari Kal dSiKa, ra p.ev 
a8t/ca, TO) rod StKaiov evavricos ,^aiv6p,eva Ik pLevdhiKOVKai 
KaKov eavrov decx}poviJLeva,rjSea, rd Se SLKaLadrjSearara,eK 

5 he SiKaiov rrdvra rdvavria Travrl irpos dpL<j)6Tepa. 
KA. OatVerat. 

A0. Trjv 8' dXrjOeiav rrjs Kpioeojs TTorepav Kvpicorepav 
elvaL (f)djpLev; irorepa rrjv rrjs ;\;eL/30i^os" ^VXV^ V 'T'W '^V^ 

74 



N0M12N B 663 c 

^cXtlovos ; 

KA. ^AvayKaZou ttov rrjv tt]S ajjueivovos. d 

A0. 'Avay/catov dpa rov dSiKov ^iov ov fjuovov ato-xtco 
/cat ixoxQy]por€pov , dXXd koL drjSearepov rfj dXrjOeia rod 
hiKaiov T€ elvai kol oglov ^iov. 

KA. ^^iv^vvevei Kara ye rov vvv Aoyov, ch <f)iXoi. 5 

A0. NofjLoderrjs Se ov n Kal apuKpov ocjyeXos, el Kal [xrj 
rovTo rjv ovrcos ^X^^> ^^ '^^^ ^^^ avro 27P^X ^ Xoyos k'xeiVy 
€L7T€p TL Kal dXXo €r6X[xr]G€V dv €77* dyaOw ijjevheodai rrpos 
Tous" viovsy €GTiv OTL TOVTOV if/evSos XvGLTeXeGTepov dv 
iipevGaro irore Kal SvvdjjLevov ixdXXov TTOielv firj ^la aXX e 
eKovras iravras iravra rd hiKaia; 

KA. KaAov (lev Tj dXi^deia, w ieve, Kal fJiovLiJiOV eoiKe 
fJLrjv ov paScov elvai neideLV. 

A0. Etev TO jievTOi Si5o>vlov fjbvdoXoyrjfJia paSiov 5 
€yev€TO ireideiv, ovtojs diridavov ov, /cat aAAa jxvpia, 

KA. Rota; 

A0. To GirapevTCOv irore oSovrwv orrXiras ii avrwv 
</>€vaL. KaiTOi fJLeya y* IgtI vofjLoderrj Trapdheiypia tov 

7T€LG€LV OTL dv €7TL')(^eLpfj TLS TTetdeLV rds TiJJV V€OJV ^V')(ds , 664 

ojGT€ ovSeu dXXo avTOV Set GKoirovvra dvevpiGKeiv r) rt 
7T€LGas fxeyLGTOV dyadov epydoaLTO dv ttoXiv, tovtov Be 
TTept ndoav fJL'q^^avriv evpiGKeiv dvrivd irore rponov rj roi- 
avTT) GVvoiKLa irdoa Trepl tovtwv ev Kal ravrov on fjudXiGTa 5 
(f>deyyoLT* del Sta ^lov navros ev re wSals Kal fivdocs Kal 
Xoyois. el 8' ovv dXXrj tttj 8o/c€t r) ravrr], Trpos ravra ovSels 
<j>d6vos d[X(f)LG^r]TrJGaL rco Xoyw. 

KA. AAA ov iJLOL(f)aLveTaL7rp6s ye ravra BvvaGdaiTjiJLcov b 
afi(f)LG^rjrrJGaL ttot' dv ovherepos . 

A0. To jxerd rovro roivvv epuov dv e'iiq Xeyeiv. (f)rjixl 
yap dTTavras helv eTraheiv rpels dvras rovs x^povs en veais 
ovGais raZs i/jv^olZs Kal dTraXats rcov iraihoiv, rd re dXXa 5 
KoXd Xeyovras irdvra oca SieXrjXvdafxev re Kal en 8teA- 
doLfjuev dv, ro he Ke^dXatov au rovro eGrw rov avrov 
rjbiGrov re Kal dpiGrov vtto ^ecDv ^iov Xeyeodat ^doKovres, 
dXrjdeGrara epovfjuev dp,a, kol pidXXov ireiGopiev ovs Set C 
rreWeiv -^ idv dXXojs ttcjs ^deyy copied a Xeyovres. 

KA. HvyxojpTjreov d Xeyeis. 

A0. Upojrov fiev roivvv 6 MouacDv x^P^^ ^ TratSt/cos" 

76 



664 c HAATftNOS 

5 opOorar av elaioi tt/ocotos" ra Toiavra els to jxeGOV aaofievog 
aTTaarj cnrovS'^ /cat oXr] rfj TToAet, Sevrepos Se d p^^XP^ rpid- 
Kovra ircov, tov re Ylaidva eiTLKaXovpievos p^dprvpa rcov 
Xeyop^evcDV dXrjdelas irepi /cat rots' veois IXewv p^erd veiOovs 

d ylyveadai eTrev^dp-evos' Set Se St^ /cat erirpirovs rovs VTrep 
rpidKovra err] p^GXpi' tcjv i^rjKovTa yeyovoras aSctv rovs 
8e /xera raura — ovydp erihvvarol^ipeiv oj^ds — puvdoXoyovs 
7T€pl rcjjv avTcov rjdcov Std deias <f)'qp,rj£ KaraXeXel^dai, 

5 KA. KiyeLS Se, (L ^eve, rivas tovtovs rovs x^po?)? rovs 
Tpirovs ; ov yap irdw avvUp^ev aa<j){x)s on Trore ^ovXei 

^pd^€LV aVTCJV TTepi. 

A0 . Kat pir]v eloiv ye ovtol ax^Sov Jjv X^P^^ ^^ TrXeZoroL 
Tcjv epLTTpocrdev ipp-qOr^aav Xoycjv. 
e KA. OvTTO) pL€p,adi]KapL€V, dAA' €Tt (ja(j)iaTepov Treipcj 
(j>pdl,eLV. 

A0. EtTTOjLtei/, €t pL€pLvijp,€da, /cttT* dpxds Twv Xoycov, d)£ 

rj ^vGLs dTrdvTCJv tojv vewv ^idirvpos ovoa rjavxi'O.p ovx ota 

5 re dy€LV ovre Kara to acD/xa ovre Kara ttjv (f)covr)V €L7j, 

<f)6€yyoiTO 8' det drdKrcos /cat TnjScp, rd^ecos 8* aiodrjOLV 

TOVTCov dp,<j)OTip(xjVy T(x)V dXXo)V pukv t,(x)OJV ovhkv e^aTTTOtro, 

7] 8€ dvdpcoTTOv <f)VGLs ^'xot /xovT^ TOVTO' rfj Stj ttjs KLvqoews 

665 Tcifet pvdpLog oVojLta etT^, ttJ 8^ au ttJs" (fxxJvrjSyTOV t€ o^eos 

dpua /cat ^apeos ovyKepavvvpievcov, appuovla ovopua irpoaayo- 

pevoLTO, ;)^op€ta 8e rd ovvapi^oTepov KXrjdeLrj. deovs Be 

€(j)apL€v iXeovuras rjpLdg ovyxopevrds re /cat x^PW^^^ r)pLLV 

5 8e8a»/ceVat rdv t€ 'ATrdAAcova /cat Moi;cras', /cat Srj /cat TpiTOV 

€(f}ap,€v, el pLepivrjp,eda, Alovvoov. 

KA. riaJS" 8' ov piepivrjpieda; 

AG). '0 jLtei' Toivvv TOV ^ AttoXXcovos /cat tcDv Movacov 
b x^P^^ etprjvraL, tov Se TpiTOV /cat rdv AotTrdv x^pov dvdyKTj 
TOV Alovvgov Xeyeadai. 

KA. Yiios 817; Xeye' p,dXa yap aTorros yiyvoiT dv ojs 
ye e^ai(/)vrjs dKovaavn Aiovvaov Trpea^VTajv x^P^^> ^^ ^P^ 
5 ol vnkp TpidKOVTa /cat TrevTrjKOVTa 8e yeyovores errj pLexpt' 
e^iJKOVTa avro) x^P^^^ovcnv. 

A0. 'AXrjdeoTaTa puevTOL Xeyeis. Xoyov Srj Set TTpos 
Tavra o IpbaLyOTrrj rovro evXoyovovTCO yiyvop^evov dv yiyvono . 
KA. Tt /xtJi/; 
10 A0. ^Ap* ovv rjpLLV Td ye epLTTpoaOev opLoXoyelTac ; 

76 



NOMfiN B 665 c 

KA. ToV 77€/0t; C 

A0. To Setv TTCLvr' duSpa /cat 7rat8a, iXevOepov /cat 
SovXov, drjXvv re /cat dppeva, /cat 0A17 r-ry TroAet oAt^j^ ttjv 
ttoXlv avTTjv avrfj eira^ovGav /jltj Traveadal rrore ravra a 
SieXrjXvOafxev, dfjuajs ye ttcds del fiera^aXXofJieva /cat rravrajs 5 
77ap€;(o/>t€va iTOLKiXiav, cocrre dTrXrjariav elvai rcva tcjv 
Vfjivcov Tots" dSovcnv /cat rjhovqv. 

KA. ricD? 8* ou;^ o/xoAoyotr' av Setv ravra ovroj irpdr- 
readai; 

A0. riou St^ rovd^ rjfjblv ro dpiarov rrjs TroAeaJS", T^At/ctats* d 
r€ /cat dfJLa (f)povrja€(JLV 7Tidav<x>rarov ov rcbv iv rfj TToAet, 
aSov rd /caAAtcrra ^eytcrr' dv €^epydt,OLro dyadd; 7) rovro 
dvoT^rcos ovrcos d(f>ij(jofX6v, o Kvpuwrarov dv ett] rcov /caAAt- 
Grcov re /cat dxjyeXiixcDrdrcjv ojhcjv ; 5 

KA. *AAAa d^vvarov ro jLte^t€Vat,cj? ye rdvvv Xeyofieva. 

A0. IlcDs' ovv TTpeTTOV dv etrj rovro; Spare el rfjSe. 

KA. n^ 87^; 

A0. lids TTOV ycyvofievos irpeo^vrepos okvov rrpos rds 
cZ>8as'/x€crTOS', Kalxaipeire rjrrovTrpdrrajv rovro KaldvdyK7]s e 
yiyvojjLevTjs alaxyvoir^ dv fiaXXov, dacp rrpea^vrepos /cat 
aoj(f>poveGrepos yiyverai, roaw fjidXXov. dp* ovx ovrcos; 

KA. Ovroj ixkv ovv. 

A0. V Kovv ev 9 edrpco ye KaliTavroioLS dvOpihiTOLS aheiv 5 
eardjs opdos en fidXXov aloxyvoir dv /cat ravrd y' el 
Kadairep ol irepl vlkyjs XO/oot dya}VLl^6fJLevoiiTe(f)Cova(TK7]K6res 
laxvoire /cat d.GLroi dvayKdl^oivro dSecv olroiovroi, rravrd- 
TracLV TTOV dr]ha)s re /cat alG^wnqXCos aSovres dirpodvixws 
dv rovr^ epyd^oLvro ; 10 

KA. 'Avay/catorara fievroL AeyetS". 666 

A0 . rTaJS" ovv avrovs TrapapLvQ-qGoixeOa Trpodvfxovs etvai 
Trpos ras wSds ; dp ov voiioderrjuoixev irpojrov puev rovs 
7Tat6as P'^xpi' ird)v o/CTa>/cat8e/ca ro Trapdirav olvov [jltj yev- 
eodaiy hihdaKovres d)s ov XP'^ tt^/o ^ttl TTvp oxereveiv ets re 5 
ro ad)fjLa /cat rrjv ifjvx'^v> rrplv evrt rovs ttovovs eyx^ipelv 
TTOpeveGdaiy rrjv epLfxavrj evXa^ovpuevovs e^iv rcov veojv 
fiera 8e rovro olvov jxev Srj yeveadai rov fxerplov /x€;^/)t 
rpiaKovra erdjv, ixediqg 8e /cat TVoXvoivias ro irapdirav rov b 
veov arrex^oBai' rerrapaKovra Se em^aivovra.ercov iv rots' 
uvaaLrlois evcoxv^^^'''^ KaXeiv rovs re dXXovs Beovs /cat 817 

77 



666 b nAATfiNOS 

/cat AiovvGOv TTapaKaXeXv els rr^v rcov Trpea^vrepcDV reXerrjv 

5 a/xa Kal TTacSLav ,rjv tols avOpcjiroiseTTLKovpov TrjsTOvyijpojs 

avGT7]p6rrjros ihcjoptjoraro [rov otvov] (jyapfiaKOv, coare 

avq^dvrjixds ,Kal hvcrdvpiias AtJSyj yiyveddaLixaXaKwrepov e/c 

C GKArjporepov to rrjs ijjvx'^s rjSoSy Kada7T€p<ei> els irvp 

aihripov ivredevra yiyvofievoVy /cat ovtcjs evTrXaarorepov 

elvai; rrpaJrov fiev Stj SiareOels ovrcos eKaaros ap* ovk av 

ideXoLTTpoOvfJiOTepov ye ,'^rTov atcr^^uvd/xevos", ovKevTToXXois 

5 aAAa eV jxerpiois, /cat ovk ev aXXorpioLS aAA* ev olKeioLSy 

aheiv re /cat o iroXXaKis eupi^KapLev CTraSetv; 

KA. Kat TToXv ye. 

A0. Et? /xeV ye to vpoayeiv toIvvv avTovs pLeTexetv 
TjfjLLV qjdrjs ouTOS 6 TpoTTOs OVK oiv TTavTOLTTacrLV dax'ijp'ijov 
d yiyvoLTO . 

KA. OvSapLcos. 

A0. Ilotav 8e r\Govaiv ol avhpes ^oiVTjv ; rj p,ovaav [t^] 
hrjXov OTL TTpeTTOvaav avTots Set ye TLva. 
5 KA. Ilco$ yap ov; 

Avy. Its' av oui^ TTpeTTOL tfetois avbpauLV ; ap av rj rayv 

KA. 'HjLtets" yovVy c5 fcVe, /cat otSe ot5/c dXXrjv av Tiva 
Svvalfieda coBrjv t) y^v ev toZs x^P^^^ ifxadofxev avvrjOeis 
lo aheiv yevofxevoi. 

A© . Et/coTcus" ye* ovTcos" yap ovk eTnj^oXoi yeyovaTe ttjs 

e KaXXLGTTjs coSijS' OTpaTOTTehov yap TToXiTeiav e^eTe aAA' 

OVK ev d<jTeGL KaTCpKr^KOTOJV y aAA olov dBpoovs ttwXovs ev 

dyeXrj vefiofievovs (j)opfidhas tovs veovs KeKT7]ade' Xa^cbv 

8' v/jicbv ovSels Tov avTOV, irapd tojv avvvopLWv andaas 

5 (j<j>6hpa dypiaivovTa /cat dyavaKTOvvTa , Ittttokop^ov t€ cttc- 

GTYjaev tSta /cat TiatSeuet iprjx^^^ "T^ ^al rj/JLepwv, Kal irdvTa 

7Tpoo"iJKovTad7ToSiSovsTfj 7raihoTpo(j)iaodev ovfxovov dyaSos 

667 av GTpaTLCOTiqs e'ir^y ttoXlv Se /cat dcTr] Swdpuevos StoiKelVy 

ov Srj /car' ap^ds eLTTOfiev twv TvpTaiov TroXepLiKaJv etvai 

TToXefJLLKcoTepov y TeTapTOV dpeTTJs dXX* ov npajTov ttjv 

dvBpelav KTrjjJLa TifxcovTa del Kal TravTa^ov , tStcurats" re /cat 

5 (JvpLTrdoTj TToXei. 

KA. Ovk otSarjficxJVyd) $ev€, OTTrjirdXLvavTOvsvoiioBeTas 
(j>avXit,eLS ' 

A0. Ovk, (Lyade, Trpoaexcov tovtco rov vovv Bpcb tovto, 

78 



N0M12N B 667 a 

€LTT€p' dAA* o Aoyos" OTTT] <f>€p€i, TavrT) TTopcvcofieda, el j8oi>- 
Xecrde. el yap exop^ev p^ovaav rrjg ra>v ^^payv koXXloj /cat 10 
rrjs ev rots kolvols dedrpois, ireipcopLeda oLTTohovvaL tovtols b 
OV9 (f)ap,ev eKeivqv pikv alGxvveadaty l^rjreLV Se,'qT(,9 KaXXiGrrj , 
TaVT7]S KOivcoveiv. 

KA. Udvv ye. 

A0. OvKovv TTpajTOV p,ev Set roSe ye VTrdpx^iv aTraaiv 5 
odois orvp^TTapeTreraL rug x^P^^i ^ rovro avro pLovov avrov to 
(TTTOvSacoTarov €ivaL,rj riva opdorrjra, t] to rpirov cocfyeXlav ; 
otov Srj Xeyoj iScoSfj /xev /cat Troaet /cat avpLTrdar) rpocfyj] 
TTapeTTeadai pikv rrjv ;^aptv, -^v rjSovrjv dv TTpoaeiTroipLev' rjv 
§€ opdoTTjTd re /cat (h<f)eXiav, oirep vyieivov rcov 7rpoG(f)epO' C 
pLevojv Xeyopiev eKdarore, tovt' avro etvac ev avroZs Kat to 
opBoTaTOV. 

KA. YldvV pL€V ovv. 

A0. Kat pLTjv /cat rfj piadiqaei rrapaKoXovdelv puev to ye 5 
TTJs x^pf''^os, rrjv iqSovrjv, ttjv Se opOoTrjTa /cat ttjv oj^eXLav 
/cat TO ev /cat to KaXois ttjv dXi^deLav etvat ttjv aTTOTeXovaav, 

KA. "Ecrrtv ovTCog, 

A0. Tt 8e TTJ Tcov opLOLwv ipyaGLO, oaai rep^vat et/ca- 
(jTLKai; dp* ovk, dv tovto e^epydt,a)VTaiy to pLev tjSovtjv ev d 
avTOLs yiyveadat irapeTTopLevov, edv yiyvrjTai, X^P^^ avTO 
St/catorarov av etr] Trpoaayopeveiv ; 

KA. Nat. 

A0. Trjv Se ye opfioTTjTd ttov tojv tolovtcuv t) laoTrjs 5 
av, <hs eiTL TO ndv elireiVy i^epyd^oiTO tov re ToaovTOV /cat 
Tov TOiovTOV TTpoTepoVy dXX ovx rjSovrj. 

KA. KaXd)£. 

A0. OvKovv rjSovfj KpivoiT* dv puovov eKeZvo opdojs, o 
pi'qTeTLvd(h<j)eXiav piTire dX-qdeiav pu'qTe opLOL6rr]Taa'TTepyat,6- 10 
pevov napex^Tai, jtxT^S' olv ye ^Xd^rjv, dAA' avrov rovrov e 
pLovov eveKa yiyvoiro rod avpLTrapeTTopLevov rot? dAAot?, r-^s" 
xdpiroSy Tjv St) KdXXiard tls 6vop,daaL dv rjSovr^v, orav pL7]Sev 
avrfj rovrcov eiraKoXovdrj ; 

KA. ^A^Xa^rj Xeyeis tjSovtjv pLovov. 5 

A0. Nat, /cat TratStdv ye elvai rrjv avrrjv ravriqv Xeyco 
Tore, orav pui^re tl ^Xdirrrj pmjre (h<f)eXfj GTTOvbrjs t] Xoyov 
d$tov. 

KA. ^AXrjdearara Xeyeis. 

79 



667 e nAATfiNOS 

lo A0. 'A/o' ovv ov Trdaav filfirjaiv (fyaifiev av Ik tojv vvv 

XeyofjLevojv TJKiara rjSovfj TrpoarjKeiv KpLveadai Kal So^r] firj 

668 aXrjdei — Kal 8r) Kal Trdaav laorrjra' ov yap el' rep Bok€l rj 

€L TLS XaLp€L TO), TO y€ loOV toOV Ovhk TO GVpLpieTpOV av €L7) 

(Jvp,fjL€Tpov 6Xa)5 — aAAa to) dXr^deLTTavrajv /AaAtara, rJKiGTa 
Se OTCpovv dXXo); 
5 KA. HavTOLTTacTi. fxev odv. 

A0. OvKovv jjLovGLK'ijv y€ irdddv (/)aiJL€v elKaaTiKTjV re 

€LVai Kai fMLfJLTjTLKljv ; 

KA. Tt fxijv; 

A0. "H/ctcrr'a/oa orav tl? pbovaLKTjV rjBovfj cfyfj KpiveaO at y 
lo TOVTOV anoSeKTeov tov Xoyov, Kal ^rjTTjTdov rjKLGTa TavTrjv 
b ^S" OTTOvhaiaVy el' tls dpa ttov Kal yiyvoiTO, dXX iK€Lvrjv ttjv 
€)(^ovaav TTjv o/jiOLOTrjTa rep tov KaXov pLijxrjpLaTi. 
KA. AXrjOeaTaTa. 

A0 . Kal TOVTOis St) rots rrjv KaXXiaTiqv cpSi^v re ^tjtovgl 
5 Kai pbovaav ^T^rryreov, d)S €olk€V, ovx '^ti9 rjhela aAA' rJTi9 
opd-q' fXifjuqGeajs yap rjvy a)s ^a^ev, opdoTiqs, et to (.upur^Okv 
ouov re Kal olov rjv diroTeXolTO. 
KA. Yiibs ydp ov; 

A0. Kal pi.riv TOVTO ye Tvds av ofioXoyol irepl rrjg /jlov- 
10 aiKrjSy OTL TTOLVTa Ta 7T€pl avTTjV €GTLV TTOLTjixaTa jLtt/zT^at? re 
C Kai aTTeLKaaia' Kal tovto ye picbv ovk av GvpLnavTes o/xoAo- 
yotev TTOi'qTai re Aral aKpoaral Kal viroKpiTai; 
KA. Kal pudXa. 

A0. Aet 8rj Kad' eKaarov ye, d)s €olk€, yiyvcxiGKeiv tcov 
5 TTOtT^/xarcov otl ttot iarlv tov pueXXovTa iv avTCp /xt) apLapTTj- 
aeadai' pur) ydp ytyvcoGKCOv ttjv ovatav, tl rroTe jSouAerat 
/cat oTov TTOT* iarrlv gIkcov 6vT(x)Sy axoXfj Tiffv ye opdoTrjTa 
TTJs ^ovXrjuecos tj Kal dpuapriav avTOV Stayvcucrerat. 
KA. Jlx^Xfj' TTws 8' ov ; 
d A0. '0 8e TO 6pd(x)s puTj yiyvcjGKCxJV dp dv ttot€ to ye 
eu Kal TO KaKcos BvvaTOS €Lr] hiayvdjvai ; Aeyoi Se ov Travv 
(ja<j)(x)s, aAA* c58e aacfyeciTepov Xacos dv Xexdeirj. 
KA. Ucos; 
5 A0. Etcrlv SiJttov /cara ttjv oipLV rjpilv aTret/cao-tat puvpiai, 
KA. Nat'. 
A0. Tt ovv el' Tt? Kal iv tovtois dyvool tcov pLepLipbi)- 

pL€VOJV OTL TTOT* €(JtIv €.KaGTOV [tcDv (7a>/>tdT6t>v] / dp dv TTOT€ 

80 



NOMflN B 668 d 

TO ye opdchs avrojv eipyacT/jLevov yvourj ; Xeyco 8e ro rotovSc, 
OLOV Toifs apidfxovs rod (jcjixaros /cat eKOLGrcov rwv fiepajv lo 
ras" Secret? el ex^^, ogol re elaiv Kal oirola Trap* oTTota avTCJv e 
Keipieva ttjv TrpoorjKovGav tol^lv arreiX'qcjyev — koI ert Sry XP^~ 
/xara re /cat G)(rjpLaTa — tj TrdvTa ravra reTapay/xeVcos" elp- 
yacrrat* /xcDv 8o/c€t raur' av Trore Stayvcovat rt? to iraparrav 
ayvocjv otl t^ot eaTi to p.epLLpLr)fjievov t,chov; 5 

KA. Kat TTCJs; 

A0. Tt 8' et yiyvo)GKOLp,ev otl to yeypapipuevov 7] to 
TTeirXacrpLevov IgtIv avOpcoiros, /cat ra piepr] Travra ra eavTov 
/cat ;)^p66jLtaTa a/>ta /cat ax'^pio.Ta (XTre LXr](f)ev vtto ttjs Texv'^'S; 669 
dpa ye avayKaZov rjSr] tco raura yvoi/rt /cat e/cetvo crot/xco? 
ytyvc6cr/c6ti/, etre /caAov etre 07717 ttotc eAAtTres" ai^ eti^ /caA- 
Aous"; 

Kj\. navres" jLtevrav cos" eVo? etTretv, oi ^eW, ra /caAa 5 
TcDv t,cx)Oiv eyLyvcjOKopLev . 

A0. 'Op^orara Aeyets". ap' ow ou Trept eKacrTrjv et/cova, 
/cat €v ypa(f)LKfj /cat €i/ pbovcriKfj /cat TrdvTT), tov pueXXovTa 
epi<f>pova KpiTrjv edeadai hel raura rpta ^x^tv, 6 re eart 
TTpojTOv yiyvaxjKeLV, eTretra co? opdcbs, eneid^ co? €U, to b 
TpiroVy etpyaaTat tcjv eiKOvcov rjTLaovv [p'qpuaaL tc /cat pueXeai 
/cat Tots" pvdpLoZs]; 

KA. "Eot/c€ yovv. 

A0. Mt7 Toivvv OLTTeLTTOjpbev XeyovTes to Trepl ttjv piov- 5 
GLKTjV fj p^aAeTTov eTTeiSrj yap vpivelTai Trepl a-UTrjv Sta- 
<J>ep6vTa)S "^ Tas" aAAas" et/cdi^a?, etJAa^etasr St) SetTat irXeiaTr^s 
TTaawv eiKovayv. dpLapTcov Te yap tls pieyiaT* dv /SAaTTTOtTO, 
-^^17 /ca/ca (f)LXo(f)povovpLevos , ;)^aAe7rcoTaTdv t£ aladeadai 8ta c 
TO Tous" TTOtT^Tas" cf)avXoTepov£ etvat TTOuqTds avTOJV tojv 
M.ovGa)v. ov yap dv eKeZvai ye e^apidpTOiev iroTe togovtov 
oiOTe p-qpLaTa dvhpayv TTOirjuaaai to oxfjfJLa yvvaiKcJJv Kat 
/xeAos" (XTToSowat, /cat pLeXos eXev6epa>v av /cat GX'^p^o.Ta 5 
avvdeZaai pvOpuovs SovXojv /cat dveXevdepuiv irpocrappLOTTeiv , 
ovS* av pvdpiovs /cat ax^p^o, eXevdepiov VTrodeZaai /xeAos" "^ 
Adyov evavTLOv dirohovvai toZs pvOpuoZs, eVt Se dr^plajv ^covas 
/cat dvdpcjjTTOJv /cat opydvcov /cat irdvTas ip6(f)ovs els TavTOV d 
ou/c av 7roT€ aw^ctev, ct*? cV Tt /xt/xov/xevat * TiotT^Tat 8e 
avdpcoTTLvoi a(f)68pa Ta TOtavTa epiTrXeKOVTes /cat avyKVKCJVTes 
dXoyios, yeXcoT dv TrapaaKevd^otev twv dvdpa)7Ta>v daovs 

VOL. I 81 G 



669 d nAATI2N02 

5 (jyiqalv ^Op(f>€vg Xax^tv wpav rrjs repifjiog. ravrd ye yap 
opojui TTavra KVKw/JLeva, Acat en SiaaTrcoGLV ol TTOnqral pvdfxov 
fjiev Koi ax'JQfiO'Ta pueXovg x^P^^y Xoyovs iJjlXovs els piirpa 

e TiSevres, p^eXos S' av /cat pvdfjiov ctVeu prjfxdrcov, ^^Xfj KiOa- 
piaei re /cat avXrioei TrpoaxpcofievoL, iv ols Srj TTayxd-XeiTOV 
dv€V Xoyov yiyvofxevov pvd/JLov re /cat dp/jioviav yLyvwoKeiv 
on re ^ovXerav /cat oro) eocKe rajv d^ioXoyojv /xt/XTy/xarcoi^ • 

5 aAAa VTToXapeiv dvayKoiov on ro roiovrov ye TToXXrjs dypoc- 
Ktas jxearov vdv, ottouov rdxovs re /cat aTrratcrtas' /cat (fyojvijs 
drjpiwSovs G(f)6Spa ^iXov cLar avXr]uei ye XPV^^^^ '^^^ 
670 Kidapiuei ttXtjv ogov vtto opx'^i'y^v Te /cat coS-^v, ifjiXcp S' 
eKarepcp rrdad ns dfxovGLa /cat davfiarovpyia yiyvoir* dv rrjs 
XpT^crecog. ravra fxev l^et ravrj) Xoyov rjixels Se ye ovx 
on fjirj Set rat? Mowcrats' rj/Jbcbv rrpocrxpTicrOaL rovs tJSt] rpia- 

5 Kovrovras /cat rojv irevrriKOvra rrepav yeyovoras GKOTTO-Ufxeda, 
dXX on TTore Set. roSe puev ovv €/c rovrcov 6 Xoyos iq/jLLV 
So/cet fJbOL orjfxaiveLV TJSrj, rrjs ye xopi'Krjs pLOVGiqs on TreTTCU- 

b BevodaL Set ^eXnov rovs TrevrrjKovrovras oaoLGTrep dv dSeuv 
TTpoorjKr^. rojv yap pvOjJLOJV /cat rojv dp/JLOvcdjv dvayKalov 
avrolg eanv evaLGdijrcos €;^etv /cat yLyvcoCrKetv rj ttojs ng 
rrjv 6p66rr)ra yvojaerai rd)v jxeXcoVy [at TrpoarJKev rj p,rj Trpoa- 

5 rJKev rod Scopto-rt, /cat rov pvOpLOV dv 6 TTOLrjrrjs avrco 

TTpOGTJl/jeVy Opdcbs Tj /XT^],* 

KA. ArjXov d)£ ovSapLOJs. 

A0. reAoros" yap ye ttoXvs dxXos rjyovaevos iKavcbs 
yiyvdxjKeLV ro re evdpfxoarov /cat evpvdfjiov /cat /XTy, ocrot 
10 TrpoadSecv auXqi /cat ^aiveiv iv pvdfiaj yeyovaai hiiqvayKa- 
C ap^evoL, on 8e SpojGLV ravra dyvoovvres avrcjv e/cao-ra, ov 
cruXXoyl^ovraL. ro Se ttov TrpoGrjKovra p,ev exov rrdv fieXos 
opdcjs ^X^^y P'V T^poGTjKovra he rjjjLaprrjp^evajs. 
KA. 'Avay/catdrara. 
5 A0. Tt ovv 6 fiTjS^ on TTor ex^t yiyvcoGKcov ; dpa, OTcep 
eLTTop^ev, d)s 6pdd)s ye avrd ex^t, yvwaeral irore iv orcoovv; 
KA. Kat Tt? p^rjxcLvrj; 

A0. Tour' ovv, COS" eoLKeVy dvevpiaKop,ev aO t& vvv, on 

roLS (pSols '^p^'i'V, ovs vvv TrapaKaXovpiev /cat eKovras nvd 

d rpOTTOv dvayKa^opiev dheiv, p^expt' ye roaovrov TTeTraihevodaL 

cr;)^€8dv dvayKalov y p^exp^ tov Svvarov etvai cruvaKoXovdelv 

€Kaarov rals re ^daeGLV rojv pvdpLwv /cat rats ;)^op8ats' rats 

82 



N0M12N B 670 d 

TOJV fxeXoJv, Iva Kadopcovreg rds re apixovlas /cat rovs pvOfJLOv^t 
eKXiyeadai re ra TTpoGrjKOVTa otol r cLctlv a rots Tr]\iKovrois 5 
T€ /cat TOiovTOLS ttSetv TTpeiTOVy /cat ovroJ9 aScoGLV, /cat aSovres 
avTOL re rjSovas ro TrapaxprjfJ'CL daLveXs 'qScovrat /cat rots' 
vecjrepoLS rjye/JLOves rjOajv XPV^'^^^ acTTraorpiOV vpoGrfKOvros e 
yiyvojvrai' fiexpt' Se roaovrov rraihevOevres OLKpi^earepav av 
TraiSecav rrJ9 inl ro ttXtjOos (jyepovanris elev pLeraKexeipiaixevoi 
/cat rrjs irepl rovs rroLrjrds avrovs. ro yap rpirov ovSefita 
dvdyKrj TTOCT^rfj yiyvcoorKeLVy etre KaXov e'ire /jltj KaXov ro 5 
fjLLfJLTjfiay ro 8e app^ovla? /cat pvdfjbov gx^Bov dvdyKrjy rots' Se 
Trdvra rd rpia rrjs eKXoyrjs eVe/ca rov KoXXiarov /cat Sevrepov, 
Tq fjirjSeTTore Ikovov irrcoSov yiyveaOai veois TTpos dperrjv. /cat 67 1 
0776/3 o Aoyos' ev dpxoL^s e^ovXijdrj, rrjv rat rov Alovvgov 
XOp^> po-qOecav eTnheZ^ai /caAcas' XeyofJLeirqv, elg SvvafJULV 
etprjKev GKOTrcojJieda 8r) el rovd* pvroj yeyovev. dopv^coSrjs 
fjLev 7TOV 6 GvXXoyos 6 roiovros e^ dvdyKrjg 7Tpo'CovGr]s rrjs 5 
TToo-ews' €7rt fJudXXov del crvpL^aiveL ytyvofxevos, oirep virede- 
jxeda /car' dpxds dvayKaZov etvat yiyveGd ai irepl ra)v vvv 
Xeyofievcov. b 

KA. *AvdyKrj. 

A0. nets' Se ye avros avrov Kov(f)6repos atperai /cat 
yeyrjdev re /cat 7rappr]Gias e/xTrt/XTrAarat /cat dvrjKOVGrias ev 
rep roiovrcp rcov TreXas, dpxojv 8' iKavos df tot eavrov re /cat 5 
rcL)v dXXcjv yeyovevai. 

KA. Tt piriv; 

A0. OvKovv e(f)ap.ev, orav ytyvrjrai ravra, KaOdirep riva 
Gihripov rds ifsvxds rojv mvovroyv Scarrvpovs yiyvofxevas 
fjuaXdaKwrepas yiyveGdai /cat veojrepas, a>Gre evayoyyovs 10 
GvpL^aiveiv rep Swapuevcp re /cat einGrapievip rratSeveLV re C 
/cat TrXdrreiVy Kaddnep or* rjGav veat; rovrov 8 etvat rov 
TrXdorriv rov avrov oiGirep rore, rov dyadov vojJLoderrjVy oi) 
vojJLovs elvai Set GvpLTToriKovs, Swapuevovs rov eveXniv /cat 
BappaXeov eKeZvov ytyvofxevov /cat dvaiGXwrorepov rod 5 
Seovros", /cat ovk iOeXovra rd^tv /cat ro Kara piepos Giyrjs 
/cat Adyov /cat iroGews /cat pbOVGrjs VTropbeveiv, edeXetv iroieZv 
Trdvra rovrois rdvavria, /cat eiGLOvn rep purj KaXcp dappei 
rov KdiXXuGrov Siapbaxopievov ^(/)6^ov eiGTrepLTreiv olovs r d 
etvat jLtera bcKrjs, ov alScb re /cat alGxvvrjv OeZov (l)6^ov 
cuvo/xa/ca/xev; 

83 



671 d nAATfiN02 

KA. *'EcrT6v ravra. 
5 AB. TovTCov Se ye rajv vo/jlojv etvat voixo^vXaKas koX 
GvvSrjfiiovpyovs avrois rovg aOopv^ovs Koi vrjcfyovras tojv 
fjir] vrj(/)6vTCOv Grparrjyovs, ojv 8rj ;(copts' P'ddrj ^laixdx^odai 
heLVorepov t) TroAe/xtots' elvat fir] fjuera dp)(6vTCx)V ddopv^ojv, 
Kai TOP av fjLTj Swd/jLevov ideXeiv TTeideGdai tovtols kol rots' 
e rjyefjioaiv rots rov Alovvctov, tols virkp i^rjKovra errj ye- 
yovoaiVy lgtjv Kal /xetfco rrjv ala^vjrqv (f)ip€iv rj rov rols 
rov "Apecjos drreiOovvra dpxovcnv, 
KA. 'Opda>g. 
5 AG). OvKovv el ye eirj roiavrr) puev {JieOrj, roLavrrj Se 
TTacSidy fjiojv ovK (h(j)e\'iq6evTes dv ol tolovtol crv/JLTToraL kol 
fxdWov <j)iXoi Tj TTporepov diraXXdrroLVTO (xAAt^Acuv, aAA' ovx 
672 wGirep rd vvv e-)(9poi, Kara vofjbovs Si] Trdarav rrjv cruvovcnav 
(jvyyevofjievoL, Kal dKoXoydrjaavres oTvore d<j>riyolvro ol 
vrj(f)OVTes tols fJir) vrjcjiovoLV ; 

KA. ^OpdcJSy el ye 8rj elt] roiavrrj otav vvv Aeyets". 
5 A0. M-T) Toivvv eKeXvo y* en rrjs rov Aiovvgov Scoped^ 
i/jeycofjiev aTrAcDs", cos eariv KaK-q Kal els ttoXlv ovk d^ia 
TTapaSex^Gdai. Kal yap en TrAetco ns dv eTTe^eXOot Xeycov 
enei Kal ro pLeyiarov dyadov o Scopelrat Xeyeiv jJLev okvos 
eLS rovs TToXXovs Sta to KaKcos rovs dvdpiLirovs avro vtto- 
b Xa^eXv Kal yvaJvat Xe^Sev. 
KA. To TTolov hrj; 

A0. Aoyo? ns djJLa Kal 4^riixy} viroppel ttojs cos d 9e6s 
ovTos VTTO TTJs pLTjrpvds *'H/oas" S(,e(f>opi]dr) rrjs ^^XV^ '^W 
5 yvcofJLTjv, Slo rds re ^aKX^tas Kal vdaav rrjv fJLaviKrjv ep,- 
^dXXei xopelav npLcopovpLevos' ddev kol rov olvov errl rovr 
avro SeScoprjrat. eyd> Se rd puev roiavra roXs dG(f)aXes rjyov- 
(jLevoLs elvai Xeyeiv Trepl Oedjv d<j>irjpLL XeyeLv, ro 8e roaovSe 
C otSa, on Trdv ^cpov, oaov avrdj TTpoariKei vovv ex^tv reXeco- 
devn, rovrov Kal rouovrov ovhev exov rrore ^verai' ev 
rovrcp St) rw xpdvcp ev S p^rjTTO) KeKTqrat rrjV olKeiav <f>p6- 
VTjGLv Trdv /xatVerat re Kal j8oa draKrcos, Kal drav dKraivcoarj 
5 eavro rdx^Gra^ drdKrcos olv TrrjSa. dvap,vrj(jdd)p,ev Se on 
p,ovaLK7Js re Kal yvpLvaanKrjs e<j)a[X€V dpxds ravras elvai. 
KA. M.epLV'qp.eda' ri 8* ot^ 

A0. OvKOVv Kal on rrjv pv9p.ov re Kal dpp^ovlas al- 
d (jdiqaLv rols dvOpcoTTOcs rjfJLiv evbeScoKevat rrjv dpx^v ravrrjv 

84 , 



NOMfiN B 672 d 

€<f)afjL€v, ^AnoXXcjova 8e /cat Moucja? Kau Atovucrov toutojv 
aiTLOVs y€yov€vaL; 

KA. nctj? yap ov; 

A0. Kat St] Koi rov olvov ye, ws koiKcv, 6 tcjv aXKojv r 
Aoyos", Iva fjLavcjfiev , (f)rjGLV inl rt/xajpta ri] tojv dvdpa)7Ta>v 
SeSoadat' 6 8e vvu Xeyo/xevos V(f>^ -qfjicov (fxip/jiaKov errl rov- 
vavriov .<J>7)gIv alSovs /xev ^^XV^ KrrjGeojs eveKa SeSoaOaL, 
GcofJLaTO? Se vyceia^ re /cat to^uos". 

KA. KoAAtcrra, cS ^eve, top Xoyov aTTejxvqixovevKas . jq 

A0. Kat ra fiev Srj ttjs ^Ppeias 17/xtaea StaTTCTre- g 
pdvdco' rd 8' rjfiLorea, ottojs dv ere SoKrj, irepavovixev -q /cat 
eddopuev. 

KA. Ilota 877 Aeyets", /cat ttcDs" eKdrepa StatpcDv; 

A0. *'0Ai7 jLteV TTOU xppeia oX-q 7rat8euat? t^v rjpuv, rovrov c 
8' au TO /xep' pvBpLoi re koL dppoviai, to /caret rrju <f>ojvrjv. 

KA. Nat. 

A0. To 8€ ye /cara Tqv rod crcopLaros klvtjglv pvOpuov 
puev KQivdv rfj rrj^ (fxovfjg elxe KLvrjaei, axVH'^ ^^ lBlov 
eKel 8e ueAos" 17 rrjs (j)OJvr\s Kivqais. 573 

KA. ^AXrjdeGrara. 

A0. Ta pLev Toivuv rrjg (jicovfjs P'^XP'' '^V^ 4^^XV^ TTpog 
dpe-cyiv noLiSeioL^ ovk ot8 ovriva rpoirov d)vop,dorapLev puov- 

aLKTjV. ^ 

KA. *Opdojs p^ev ovv. 

A0. Td 8e ye row awpiaros, a Trai^ovrajv dpx'rj(Ji^v et- 
TTO/xev, ecti^ H'^XP'' "^^ '^^^ crajpLaros aperrjs rj roLavrq klpyj- 
GLS ylyvrjTaiy ttjv evrexyov aycuyrjv ein to tolovtov avTOV 
yvpLvacmKrjv TrpoaeiTTajpuev. 10 

KA. 'Op^orara. 

A0. Td 8e TTJs povGiKTJs, o vvvSrj (TX^Sov rjpLLGV 8te- 5 
XrjXvdevat ttjs ;)(;opetas' eliropev /cat ^LaireTrepdvOaL, /cat vw 
OVTOJS elpriado}' to 8' rjpLiov XeycopLev, 7) ttcDs" /cat ttt^ ttoltj- 
Teov; 

KA. ^£^ dpLGTe, l^prjalv /cat Aa/ce8at/Ltovtots' 8taAeyo/xevos', c 
pLOVGLKTJs Trepc SieXdovTOJv rjpLctJVy eXXeLTTovTUJv 8e yvpLva- 

<TTLKrJ9y TL TTOTe Otet 0"0t TTOTepOV TJpLOJV aTTOKpiveiGdaL TTpog 
TavTTjv TTjv epojTrjGiv ; 

A0. * KiTOKeK piGd at eyojy* dv ae <j>ai'qv gx^^ov ravr' 
€p6pi€vov Ga(f>a)s, /cat pLavOdvco (Ls epa)T7]GLS ovGa avTij q 

85 



673 c nAAT12N02 

ra vvv OLTTOKpials re ianv, (Ls cittov, /cat en TTpoara^Ls 
hiairepdvaGdai to, Trepl yvpivauriKrjs . 

KA. "A/otcr^' VTriXa^is re kol ovtoj Srj ttoUl. 
5 A0. UoLTjreov ovSe yap ttolvv 'xpXeTTov icrnv elTreiv vpuv 
ye d{ji(f)OT€poLS yvcopipia. ttoXv yap iv ravrrj rfj re^Q^rj irXeov 
ifiTTeipias 'q iv eKelvrj /xerep^ere. 
KA. Iu)(€h6v dXrjdrj Xeyeis. 

A0. OvKOVv av ravTiqs dpxrj fJLev rrjs TratStas" ro Kara 

d <I)VGLV TTTjSdv eWiaSai irdv l,a)ov, ro Se dvOpojTnvov, d>s 

e(j)ap.€V, a'iad7)(jiv Xa^ov rod pvdjJLOv iyewrjaev re 6p)(riGLv 

Kal ereKeVy rod he fJueXovs VTTOjJLifjLVT^dKovros Kal eyeipovros 

rov pvOfjLoVj KOLvcjdevr dAAT^Aots ;)^opetW /cat TratStai^ ere- 

5 Kerrjv. 

KA. ^AXrjdeGrara. 

A0. Kat ro fjuev, (j)apiev, 'qSr] SceXrjXvdafJLev avrov, ro Se 
TTeipaoopieBa i^e^rjs SieXdelv. 
KA. Udvv fiev ovv. 
lo A0. 'ETTt roivvv rfj rrjs [xeOrj^ XP^^^ '^^^ KoXoc/xjjva 
e TTpcorov incdcofxeVj el /cat G(l>a)v avvSoKeX. 
KA. TloLOV St] /cat TtVa Xeyeis ; 

A0. Et pLev ns ttoXls cLs ovotjs GTTOvhrjs rep eTnrrjSev- 

puan rep vvv elprjpievcp ;)^/97^creTat puerd vopLCOV /cat rd^ecxjs, 

5 COS" rov aaxjypoveZv eVe/ca pieXerrj )(pa)p,evr}, /cat rojv dXXwv 

rjSovdJv pLT] d(j)e^erai ojaavrws /cat Kara rov avrov XoyoVy 

rod Kparetv avrcov eVe/ca pLrjxavojpLevr] , rovrov pLev rov 

rpoTTOv diraGL rovroLs x/^i^crreov el S* ws TratSta re, /cat 

e^earai rep ^ovXopbevcp Kal orav ^ovXrjrat Kal p,e6^ a>v dv 

674 ^ovXrjraL iriveiv pLer^ e7nr'rjSevpidra)V djvnvcovovv dXXojv, ovk 

dv rLdeipLTjv ravrr^v rrjv iprj(f>0Vy d)s Set rrore p^edrj ')(prjodaL 

ravrrjV rrjv ttoXlv t) rovrov rov dvSpa, aXX* en pidXXov rrjs 

}^p7]rdjv Kal AaKeSaipiovLOJV ^(^peias TrpocrdeLpirjv dv rep revv 

5 }^ap)(r]SovLejiJV vopuep, p,rjSe7rore purjSeva enl arparoneSov yev- 

ecrdai rovrov rov Treopiaros, dAA' vhpoTToaiais ovyyiyveodaL 

rovrov rov XP^^^^ diravray Kal Kara ttoXlv pbijre SovXrjv 

pirjre SovXov yeveadai pirjSeTTore, pLrjSe dpxovras rovrov rov 

b eviavrov ov dv dpxoJOLVy purjS av KV^epv^ras pir)8e St/cacrras" 

evepyovs ovras oivov yeveorOai ro TrapdrraVy pLTjS bans ^ov- 

XevGopuevos els ^ovXrjv d^iav nvd Xoyov avvepxeraiy purjSe 

ye pued^ rjpiepav pbrjSeva ro napdnav el pur] crco/xacr/ctas' r] 

86 



NOMfiN B 674 b 

poarojv €V€Ka, fJir]S* av vvKTOJp orav eTTivofj tls TratSa? 5 
TTOLeladaL dvrjp rj /cat yvvrj. /cat aAAa Se TrdfjUTToXXa dv rts" 
XiyoL iv ols rols vovv re /cat vofxov exovcnv opdov ov TTorios 
olvos' cScrre /cara rov Xoyov rovrov ouS' dfJbTreXcouoju dv ttoAAoji^ c 

eot ovo fjTLVL TToAet, ra/cra oe ra r aAA ai^ et?^ yecopyrj- 
puara /cat Trdaa rj Statra, /cat Si) ra ye Trepl otuov a^^Sov 
aTTdvTCov ifi/JLerporara /cat oAtytcrra yiyvoir* dv. ovros, oj 
^ivoi, rjfJitv, €t aui'So/cet, KoXocjxhv eirl rep nepl olvov Xoyco 5 
prjdevTL elprjado}. 

KA. KaAcDs", /cat crui^So/cet. 



87 



BOOK III ' 

SHORT ANALYSIS 

Book III. is, in general, a study of the origin and development 
of civic communities, undertaken specially with the view of finding 
how laws arose, and what is the effect of laws on the organism. 

676-683 e. — Prehistoric times : early forms of polity and the 
origin of law. 

683-693 C. — The Dorian Confederacy : reasons for the decline 
of Argos and Messene and for the rise of Sparta. 

693 d-698 a. — Persia as a type of autocracy : the evils of too 
great power in the governor. 

698 b-701 e. — Athens as a type of democracy : the evils of 
too great freedom in the governed. 



676 A0. Tavra jxev ovv Srj ravrrf TToAtretas" Se OLp)(rjv riva 
TTork <j)a)ix€v yeyovivai; fJLOJV ovk ivOevSe rts" ai^ avTTjv paard 
T€ Kal KaXXiGra Karihoi; 
KA. I[6d€v; 
5 A0. "OdevTrep Kal rr^v rwv TToXeojv iTTihoaiv els dperrjv 
ixera^aivovoav dfjua Kal KaKiav eKaGTore deareov. 
KA. Aeyeis Se irodev ; 

A0. Ot/xat jLtev diTO xpovov jjltJkovs re Kal aTreipias /cat 
b rwv pL€Ta^oX6jv iv rep roLovrcp. 
KA. Hois' X4y€Ls; 

A0. Oe/oe, a^* ov iroXeLs r' elalv Kal dvOpwirot ttoXl- 
T€v6p,€voi, SoKels dv TTore Karavorjaai p^/ooi^ou ttXyjOos ooov 
5 yiyovev; 

KA. OvKovv pdSiov ye ov8ap.a>s. 
Avy. 10 oe ye cds aTTAerov n /cat ap,7])(^avov av eur); 

88 



N0M12N r 676 b 

KA. Udvu fjL€V ovv rovTo ye. 

A0. Mwv ovv OX) fivptai fiev iirl {JLVpiat^ rjfjuLv yeyovdai 
TToAets" €V Tovrcp ro) xpovcp, /caret rov avrov Se rod ttXtjOovs 10 
Xoyov ovK iXdrrovs i(f)dapfji€vac; 776770 Atreu/xeVat 8' au Traaa? C 
77oAtTetas 77oAAaActs' eKaaraxov ; /cat tot€ fjLev i^ iXarrovcov 
lieit^ovSy TOT€ 8' €/c fxec^opcov iXdrTovg, /cat ^^upovs e/c 
^eXriovajv yeyovaai /cat ^eXriovs 6/c x^ipovcjv ; 

KA. ^AvayKolov. 5 

A0. Tavrris Sr] iripi Xd^ojjjiev, el Suvat/xe^a, rrjs /xe- 
ra^oXrjs ttjv alriav rdxoL ydp av tacos Set^etev rjfjLLV rrjv 
77 pwrrjv Tcov TToXireLCJv yeveaiv kol pLerd^aaiv. 

KA. Eu Aeyets", /cat TrpoOvfxelod at 8et, ere /xev o hiavofj 
irepl avTOJV a7TO(f)aiv6pL€vov, rapids 8e uvveTTopievovs . 10 

A0. ^A/a' ow vpuv ol TTaXaiol Xoyoi dXriOeiav e;^eti/ rti^a 677 
2>OKovaiv; 

KA. Ho tot h-q; 

A0. To 77oAAas" dvOpcoTTOJV ^dopds yeyovevai /cara/cAu- 
ap^OLS re /cat vdo-ots" /cat d'AAots" 77oAAots', iv ols ^po-X^ '^^ 5 
TcDv dvdpwTTOJv XeLTreadat yevos. 

KA. riai/u /xev ow TTidavov to tolovtov ttolv Travn. 

A0. Oepe 87^, voTJacopuev /xtW roiv 77oAAaii' TavT7]v rrjv 
Tw KaraKXvap,a> ttotc yevopievr]v — 

KA. To 770tov Tt 77e^t avrrjs 8Lavo7]devr€s ; 10 

A0. *Q.s ol Tore TTepi<j)vy6vTes ttjv <j)dopdv ax^^ov opeioi b 
Ttves" av elev vopirjs, ev Kopv^aZs ttov opuKpd t^ojirvpa tov 
T<JL)V dvdpcoTTCJv hiaGeocjpLeva yevovs. 

KA. AtJAoi'. 

A0. Kat 87) Tovs TOLovTovs ye dvdyKy] ttov tcDv ctAAcov 5 
ameipovs elvai, Texviiiv /cat tcjjv ev rot? daTeai Trpos aXXri- 
Aous" pLTjxo-vojv ets" re irXeove^ias kol (jyiXovLKias /cat 07700"' 
dAAa KaKovpyqp.ara Trpos dAA7JAous' eTTivoovoLV, 

KA. Et/cos" yovv. 

A0. QctjfJiev Srj rds" ev tols TreStots 77oAets" /cat Trpos C 
daXdTTTj KaTOLKovGas dpSrjv ev tw roTe xpovcp hia<f)deipeadaL ; 

KA. 0ai/xev. 

A0, OvKovv opyavd re TrdvTa aTToXXvadai, /cat et rt 
rexyrjS 'qv ex6p,evov GTTOvhaiojs r)vpr]p,evov 7) ttoXltlktjs tj 5 
/cat aortas twos erepas, rrdvTa eppeLV Tavra ev Tcp Tore 
Xpovo) (f>'}JGop,ev; ttcos ydp dv, co dpiare, et ye epLevev ra8e 

89 



677 C nAAT12N02 

ovTCO Tov TTavra ')(^p6vov cos* vvv SLaKeKoafJbrjraiy /catvov 
dvrjvpL(jK€r6 Trore Kal oriovv; 
d KA. Tovro on [xev fxvpiaKis fxvpia err] SieXdvdavev dpa 
Toifs t6t€, ;(tAta Se a<^' ov [ydyovev] -^ Sis rocravra errj rd 
/xev AaiSdXcp KaTa(f)avrj ydyovev, rd Se 'Op0et, ra Se 
HaAa/^tT^Set, rot Se Trept pLOvaiKr^v Mapcrva Kal 'OAu/xttcu, 
5 7T€pl Xvpav Se ^AfX(f)LOVL, rd Se aAAa aAAotS" 7ra/X7roAAa co? 
eTTos" eLTTelVy X^^^ '^^^ TrpcLr^v yeyovora. 

A0. "ApiGTy c5 KAetvta, Toi' <f>iXov on TrapeXiTres, tov 
dr€XVOj£ x^^^ yevofjuevov. 

KA. McDi/ <f)pdt,€LS *Ei7nfJL€VLBrjv ; 

e A0. Nat, TOUTOV 77oAu yctp 75/LttV V7T€p€7n]8rja€ TCp firj- 

X<^vr}pian rovs avfiTravrag, c3 ^tAe, o Aoyoj /zev 'HcrtoSos' 
ijjLavrevero TraAat, to) Se epyo) eKelvos aTrereAecrev, cu? vfiels 

5 KA. Oa/xev ya/) ouv. 

A0. Ov/cow o^Vco Si) Aeyco/xev e;\;etv rdre, or' iyivero 

Tj (f)6opd, rd TTcpl Toifs dvdpcjTTOvs TTpdyfiaraj pLvptav /xeV 

nva <j>o^€pdv iprjpiLav, yrjs S' acfyOovov ttXtjOos irdpLTToXv, 

t,(xjcov Se Tcbv dXXcjv eppovrojv, ^ovkoXl array Kal el' ru ttov 

lo alyojv Tr€pLXei<f)6ev ervyx'Oiv^v yivoSy aTrdvia Kal ravra 

678 vifxovGLV elvai ^rjv t6 Kar dpxds; 

KA. Ti fxriv; 

A0. ndAecus" Se /cat TToAtretas" Tre'/jt /cat vopLoOearlagy (Lv 
vvv 6 X6yo£ TjiJilv 7rap€Grr)K€Vy dp* ws €7tos euTTelv olofjueda 
5 /cat puvrnxTjv elvai rd Trapdirav; 
KA. OvSa/xcDs*. 

A0. OvACow ef iKCLvajv rcov Sta/cet/xeVa>v oyrco ra vw 
yeyovev rjfJLLV cru/XTravra, TrdAet? re /cat TroAtretat /cat rixvdi 
Kal vopLOiy Kal ttoXXt] puev TTOvrjpiay ttoXXtj Se /cat dperrj; 
10 KA. HcDs" Xiyeis; 

b A0 . ^A/f)' olofxeday CO Bavfxdcney rovs rorCy diTeipovs dvras 
TToXXcov fxev KaXcov rajv Kard rd darrjy ttoXXojv Se /cat rcov 
ivavrlcoVy reXdovs TTpos dperrjv ^ npos /ca/ctW yeyovevai; 
KA. KaAajs" etTres", /cat fxavdavofjuev o Aeyets". 
5 A0. OvKovv TTpo'Covros fJi€V rov xpo^^Vy TrXrjdvovrog S' 
rjfjLOJv rod yevovSy els Trdvra rd vvv KaOecrrrjKora TTpoeXijXvdev 
TTavra; 

KA. ^OpOorara, 

90 



NOMflN r 678 b 

A0. OvK i^ai^vris "/€, (Ls clkos, Kara GfJLiKpov Se iv 
TrafJLTToXXa) rivl ;\;/3ova). 10 

KA. Kat fjidXa TTpiireL rovO^ ovrws. C 

A0. 'E/c yap Tcov vipriXcjv els ra TreSta Kara^aiveLV, 
oTfxaL, TTauLV <f)6^os evavXos iyeyovci. 

KA. HcD? 8' ov; 

A0. *A/3* ov)( aGfxevoi }xkv iavrovs ecjpcov 8t* oXiyorr^ra 5 
€V ToZs TTepl eKelvov rov -)(p6voVy <Ta> rropeZa he, ojqt eir* 
oAAt^Aovs" Tore Tropeveadac Kara yrjv ^ Kara OdXarTav, avv 
rats rexvais ojs eiros elneLV iravra axeSov drr ojXcjXei ; 
ovpLjxioyeiv ovv dAAi^Aots' ovk rjv ot/xat a<j)6hpa hwarov 
aiSrjpos yap /cat ;)^aA/<:os' Kal iravra to. fxeraXXeXa GvyKex^fJLeva d 
rj(f)dvLaTO, coare diropia Trdaa rjv rod dvaKaSaipeadaL ra 
TOtavra, SpvorofJULas re el^ov ottovlv. el yap ttov tl Kal 
TTepLyeyovos rfv opyavov ev opeat, ravra p,ev raxv Kararpi- 
^evra r}<f)dvLaTOy aAAa Se ovk e/icAAev yevTJGeadaL, TTplv ttoXlv 5 ^ 
Tj T(x)v pieraXXecxiv d(f)LKOLTO els dvdpwTTovs rex^y}^ 

KA. Yiws yap dv; 

A0. VeveaZs ^y] TToaais vorepov olofieda rovO^ ovrcos 
yeyovevai; 

KA. /^rjXov on irapiiToXXaLS tlgLv. e 

A0. OvKOvv Kal rexyaty oaanrep Gihiqpov Seovrat Kal 
XaXKOv Kal rcjv tolovtojv aTrdvnoVy rov avrov XP^^^^ '^^^^ 
en TrXeiova i^^avta/xeVat av elev ev ra) rore; 

KA. Tt pLrjv; 5 

A0. Kat roivvv ardcris dfjua Kal TToXepLos aTTOiAcoAet Kara 
rov rore XP^^^^ TToXXaxfj- 

KA. Uws; 

A0. Iipa>rov fjuev rjydTTCJV Kal e(f)LXo(f>povovvro aXXn^Xovs 
8t* epTjfjLLav, erreira ov TrepLfJLdxyjros '^v avrots rj rpo<f)TJ. 10 
vo}jLr\s yap OVK rjv OTrdvLS, el fiij naiv Kar dpxds lgcos, fj 679 
hrj ro irXeZarov Ste^cov ev ra> rore xpo^co' ydXaKros yap 
Kal Kpecov ovBafjLOJS evSeets rjoav, en Se Or^pevovres ov 
(f)avXrjv ot)8' oXiyrjv rpo(f)r]v rrapeixovro. Kal firjv d/JLTre- 
Xovrjs ye Kal (jrpa>fjLvrjs Kal olKT^crewv Kal GKevcov ifiTTvpajv 5 
re Kal dirvpajv rjVTTOpoW at TrAao-rt/cat yap Kal ooac irXe- 
KriKal raJv rexyojv ovSe ev irpoGheovrai GiSrjpov, ravra Se 
irdvra rovroj rcb rex^a deos eSojKe TTOpi^eiv rots dvdpcjTTOLS, b 
tl'* oTTore els rrjv rocavrrjv diropiav eXdotev, exot ^XdGrrjV 

91 



679 b HAATfiNOS 

Kal iTTiSoGLV TO Tcjv OLvdpwTTOJV yivos' 7T€vr]r€9 fJiev Srj Sta 

TO roiovTov (j(f>6Spa ovk rjaav, ouS' vtto irevlas avayKal,6- 

5 fievoL Sia(f)opoL iavroXg iyiyvovro' TrXovcnoi 8' ovk av irore 

iyevovro dxpvcroL re /cat dvdpyvpoi ovres, 6 rore iv eKeivois 

Traprjv. fj S' dv irore avvoiKLa fit^re ttXovtos avvoLKfj fi'qre 

7T€Vta, (JX^Sov iv ravrrj yevvaLorara rjOrj yiyvoir dv ovre 

C ydp v^pLS ovT dSuKia, J^rjXoi re av Kal SOovol ovk iyyi- 

yvovrai. dyaOol puev Srj Sid ravrd re "^aav Kal Sid rr}v 

Xeyofjievrjv evijOecav d ydp tJkovov KaXd Kal ala^pd, evrjOeis 

6vT€s rjyovvTO dXrjdearara XeyeGOac Kal cTreiOovro. ijjevSo^ 

5 ydp VTTOVoeZv ovhels rjTTiararo Sud GO<j)iav, ayairep rd vvv, 

aAAa TTepi dcojv re Kal dvOpwTTOJV rd Xeyopueva dX7]6rj vopa- 

^ovT€S e^cov Kard ravra' StoTrep rjaav tolovtol TravrdiraGLV 

olovs avTovs r)fJi€L9 dprt SLcXrjXvdafJbev. 

d KA. E/xot yovv Srj Kal rwSe ovrcos ravra avvhoKeZ* 

A0. OvKovv €L7T0fi€V ori yeveoi SiapLOVGat iroXXal rovrov 

rov rporrov rwv rrpo KaraKXvo-fiov yeyovorcov Kal rcov vvv 

drex^orepoL fjuev Kal dpLadearepoi irpos re rds dXXas fxeX-- 

5 XovGLV elvai rex^oLS Kal rrpog rdg TToAe/xt/ca?, oaai re Tre^ai 

Kal ocrat Kard ddXarrav yiyvovrai rd vvv, Kal ocrai Srj Kara 

ttoXlv fjiovov avrov, SiKau Kal urdaeis Aeyo/xevat, Xoyois 

e epyois re fJLepirjxo^'rifxevai Trdaas fjLrjxcLi^ds els ro KaKovpyeXv 

re dXXTJXovs Kal aSt/cetv, evrjOearepoi 8e Kal dvhpeiorepoi 

Kal djjba Ga)(f)poveGrepoL Kal Gvpuiravra BiKaLorepoi; ro 8e 

rovrcov atrcov rjSrj SieXrjXvOafjiev , 

5 KA. ^Opd(x)s Xeyeis. 

A0. AeXex^co 8r] ravra rjfjLLV Kal rd rovrois Gwerropbeva 
en TTavra elprjGOco rovS^ eveKa, Iva voTJGa)fJiev roig rore 
68o vojjLCJV ns TTor* tjv X/^eta Kal ris rjv vofxoOerrjs avrotg. 
KA. Kat KaXctJS ye etpr^Kas. 

A0. ^Ap' ovv eKeZvoL puev ovr* eSeovro vofJioOercov ovre 

TTio e<j)iXeL Kard rovrovs rovs xpovovs yiyveGdai ro roiovrov ; 

5 ovhe yap ypap^puara eGri ttoj roXg ev rovro) rw fjuepei rrjs 

TTepioSov yeyovoGLV, dXX edeGi Kal rols XeyofievoLS TrarpioLS 

vofxois eiTop^evoi, t^coGLv, 

KA. EtVos" yovv. 

A0. YloXireias 84 ye rjSrj Kal rponos eGriv tls oSros. 
lo KA. TtV; 

b A0. AoKOVGL fJLOL TTavres rrjv ev rovrcp rep xp^vco ttoXl- 

92 



N0M12N r 680 b 

retav Swaareiav KaXeTvy rj Kal vvv en TToXXaxov Kal iv 
"EAAi^crt Kal Kara ^ap^dpovs euriv Aeyet S' avrrjv rrov Kal 
^'Ofjurjpos yeyovevai Trepl rrjv tcjv Ku/cAojTrcDV o'lK-qGiv, elrrajv — 

TOiGiv 8' OVT* dyopal ^ovXrjt^opoi ovre BepLKires, 3 

dAA* ol y* vipr]X6jv opecov vaiovai Kaprjva 

iv G7T€G(JL yXa<f)vpoLGiy defJLicrrevei Se eKaaros 

iraihcov t^8* aX6)((x>v, ouS* dXXriXcDV dXeyovGLV. C 

KA. "Eot/ceV ye 6 Troirjrrjs vpuv odros yeyovevai p^aptcts". 
Kal yap Sr] Kal dXXa avrov SLeXrjXvdapiev jlcclA' dcrreta, ov 
IxTjv TToXXd ye- ov yap a(j>6hpa xp^H'^^^ ot K.prJTe£ rots' 

^eVlKOls TTOLTjlxaGlV . 5 

ME. 'HjLtets* 8' av xp^f^^Bf^ f^^Vf '<^ctt eoiKev ye KpareZv 
Tcxjv TOLOVTCOV TTOirjTCJjVy OV [xevTOi AaKOJVLKov ye dXXd TLVa 
jjidXAov ^IcoviKov ^iov Sie^epxerai eKdarore, vvv fjbrjv ev d 
TO) aa> Xoyo) eoiKe pLaprvpelVy to dpxcitov avrcbv eirl rrjv 
dypLOTTjra Std ixvdoXoyias enaveveyKcov . 

A0. Nat* avpLp^aprvpel ydpy Kal Xd^iopuev ye avrov firj- 
WTTjv on Toiavrai TToXirelai yiyvovrai irore. 5 

KA. KaAcuj. 

A0. y[(x>v ovv ovK eK Tovrojv rcDv Kara fxtav OLKrjaiv Kal 
Kara yevos hieoTTapixevajv vtto diropLas rrjs ev rats' <j)dopalsy 
iv als TO TTpecrpvTaTov dpx^L Sid to ttjv dpxrjv avTolg iK e 
TTaTpos Kal fjLTjrpog yeyovevai y ois eTTOfievoi KaBdirep opviOes 
dyeXrjv fjiiav TTOirjCjovoiy Trarpovopiovixevoi Kal ^aaiXeiav 
Traadjv SiKaiOTdrrjv ^aaiXevofxevoi ; 

KA. TLdvv ixev ovv. 5 

A0. Merd he ravrd ye els to koivov fieit^ovs iroiovvTes 
TToXeis TrXeiovs avvepxovraiy Kal iirl yecopyias rots' iv rats' 
VTTCOpeiais rperrovrai TrpcoraSy Trepi^oXovs re alpLaGicLSeis 081 
rti^ds" Teixojv ipvfjLara tcov drjpiojv eveKa TTOiovvrai, fiiav 
ot/ctav av KoivTjv Kal jjieydXrjv aTroreAowres". 

KA. To yovv eiKos ravd* ovtojs yiyveodai, 

A0. Tt he; Tohe dpa ovk eiKos; 5 

KA. To TTOIOV; 

A0. Tcov oiKifjaewv tovtcjv fxei^ovcov av^avofievcjv €K 
TCOV iXaTTOvcov Kal TrpcoTWVy eKaaTrjv tcov afiiKpcov irapeivai 
Kara yevos exovaav tov t€ rrpea^vTarov dpxovTa Kal avTTJs 

93 



68lb nAA.TflN02 

b €07] arra tSta Sta to ;\;a;pts' dXX'qXcov oiKeZv, ere/oa a(j>* 
erepojv ovrcov rcbv yevvrjropojv re kol dpeipdvrcov, a eWl- 
adrjcrav irepl deovg re /cat iavrov^, KOcrpLLajrepcov puev KoafiLCj- 
T€pa KOL dvSpcKcov dvSpLKcnrepaf kol Kara rpoirov ovrcog 

5 €Ka<jTOvs ras avrcov av alpeaeiq et? rov£ TratSa? aTTorvTrov- 
jxevovs Kai TratSwv TratSas", o Xeyofiev, '^kelv e^ovras lSlovs 

VOjJLOVS €LS TTJV pLelt^OVa GVVOLKLaV. 

KA. Hcij£ yap ov; 
C A0. Ka6 p.rjv Tovs ye avrcov vofiov^ dpeaKeiv iKaarois 
dvayKalov ttov, tovs 8e rcav dXXcjv varipovs. 

KA. OvTCOS. 

A0. ^Apxfj Srj vofJLodeGLas olov ifx^avres iXdOofiev, d)£ 
5 eoiKev. 

KA. Yldvv fxev ovv. 

A0. To yovv pberd ravra dvayKalov alpeioOai rovs 
(jvveXdovras rovrovs kolvovs rcvas iavrwv, ol Srj rd Trdvrwv 
lS6vt€s vofjufjia, rd Gcf)LGLv dpidKovra avrcov fidXiara elg 
10 ro KOivov roL£ rjyejJLoai Kal dyayovGi rovs SijfjLOVs olov 
d ^aaiXevGL (f)avepd Sei^avreg eXeaOat re 86vre£, avrol [juev 
vopLoOerai KXrfdrjGovr ai, rovs Se dpxovras KaraGrrjGavres , 
apLGroKpariav nvd e/c rcov SwaGreucov iroirjGavres i} Kai 
riva ^aGiXeiaVj ev ravrrj rfj pLera^oXfj rrjs TToXireias olktJ- 

5 GOVGLV. 

KA. *E(/)e^7^s" yovv av ovrco re Kal ravrrj yCyvoiro. 
A0. Tpirov roivvv eiTTCo/JLev en rroXireias (T;^7^/xa yiyvo- 
fievov, ev a> 8r) irdvra e'lSr] Kal Tradrjjxara TToXireicov Kal djJLa 
TToXeojv GvjJLTTLTTrei yiyveGd ai. 
10 KA. To TTolov St] rovro; 

e A0. *'0 fxerd ro Bevrepov Kal "Opirjpos eTreGrjfiijvarOy 
Xeyojv ro rpirov ovrco yeyovevai. ** KriGGe he AapSjavirjv " 

/ /J tt ■> \ yf >/T\ t \ 

yap 7T0V (f)r]GLV, errec ovttco iAlos ipi] 

ev TTehicp rrerroXiGro , rroXis fxeporroov avdpcorrcoVy 
5 aAA ev vircopeiag cokovv TToAvTnoaKov iorjs. 

682 Xeyec yap Srj ravra rd enr] Kal eKeXva, a Trepl rcov K.vkXco- 

7TC0V eLprjKev, Kara deov ttcos elpr^fxeva Kal Kara cf)VGLV' 

deZov ydp ovv Srj Kal ro rroirjriKov evdeaoriKov ov yevos 

v/jLvcpSovv, TToXXojv rcjjv Kar aXrjdeiav yiyvopLevcov gvv riGiv 

5 XaptCTtv Kal ^lovGais c^aTrrerat eKdGrore. 

94 



N0M12N r 682 a 

KA. Kat fxdXa. 

A0. EtV St) to TTpoaOev TTpoeXOojfjiev en rod vvv eVeA- 
dovTOS r]ixlv fivdov rdxcL yap dv Grj/jLT^veie tl rrjs rifjierepas 
7T€pl ^ovXrjaeojs . ovkovv XPVy 

KA. HdvV fji€V ovv. b 

A0. Karoj/cta^Ty Sry, (f)ajjL€V, €K tcjv viprjXcjv €6? ficya 
re Kal KaXov Trehiov "\XioVy inl X6(f)ov nvd ovx viprjXov 
/cat exovra Trorap^ovs ttoXXovs dvojdev Ik rrjg "ISrjs (Lppbrj- 
piivovs. 5 

KA. Oacrt yovv. 

A0. ^A^' ovv OVK iv TToXAols TLGL XROVOLS TOts p,€rd TOV 

KaraKXvapLov rovro olopieda yeyovivai; 

KA. ncus" S' OVK iv TToXXois; 

A0. AcLVT] yovv €OiK€v avToZs Xijdrj t6t€ TrapeXvat rrjg 10 
vvv XeyopLevqs (f)6opds, dd ovrcos vtto irorapiovs rroXXovg c 
Kal €K Twv viffTjXdJv piovTas ttoXlv VTTedeaaVy Tnarevaavres 
ov a<f)6hpa vifjTjXots tlulv X6(f)OL£. 

KA. ArjXov ovv (1)9 TravrdTTaai rt<va> p,aKp6v aTretxov 
Xpdvov TOV TOiovTOV TrdOovs. 5 

A0. Kat aAAat ye ot/xat TroAct? TOTe KaTWKOvv TJSrj 
TTO AAat, TrXrjdvovTOjv ToJv dvdpcjrrcov. 

KA. Tt /xT^v; 

A0. At yi TTov Kal eTreaTpaTevaavTO avTjj, Kal /caret dd- 
XaTTav Se taajs", d(j)6^0is rjSr] TrdvTCov ;^pct)jLteVct>v ttj daXdTTjj. lo 

KA. OatWrat. d 

A0. Ae/ca S' €T7^ TTOV pLeivavTes *A;)^atot tt^v Tpoiav 
avacTTaTOv iTToirjaav. 

KA. Kat /xaAa. 

A0. Ovkovv iv tovtw tw xR^^V, ovtl 8e/C€T€t, ov to 5 
"lAtov iiroXiopKeZTOy ra tcjv TToXiopKovvTCJv iKdoTCOv olkol 
/ca/ca TToAAa Gvve^aivev yLyv6p,6va rrepl ra? GTdaets twv 
V€a)V, OL Kat a(f)LKopi€vovs Tous" GTpaTLcoTas €LS ras" avTcov 
TrdActs" T€ /cat OLKtas ov /caAcos" ouS* iv Slktj vireSi^avTO, 
aAA* cScrre davdTOVs t€ Kal G<f>ayds Kal <f)vyds yeveadat e 
Tra/xTToAAas" ot ttoXiv iK7T€(j6vT€S KaTTjXdov pLeTa^aX6vT€s 
ovo/xa, Acopirjs dvT* 'A;\;atcuy KXrjBevTes hid to tov avXXi- 
^avra etP'at ras" rdre (fyvyd^ Acopta. /cat 817 raura ye i^Sry 
77-av^ vpeXg, w Aa/ce8at/xdj^tot, ravreu^ev pLvdoXoyeuTe re /cat 5 
otaTre/aatVere . 

95 



682 e nAAT12N02 

ME. Tt /x^V; 

A0. "Odev St) Acar' dpxoLS i^erpaTTOfJieOa rrepl vo/jlcuv 8ta- 

XeyofJievoi, irepLireaovres fiovGLKrj re /cat rats' jLte^at?, vw 

lo €7rt ra avra ttolXiv acfyiyfjueda cjoirep Kara deov, /cat o Aoyo? 

rjixXv olov Xa^rjv (XTToStScDcrtv i^'/cet yap eirl rrjv ct? Aa/ccSat- 

083 fiova KaroLKiGiv avrrjvy 7]V vpuels 6p6a)s €<j)are KaroLKetadai 

— /cat K.pr)Tr]v co? dSeA^ot? v6}xols. vvv ovv hrj roaovSe 

irXeoveKTOV/JLev rfj TrXdvrj rod Xoyov, Sta TToAtretaji^ tlvcjv 

/cat KaroLKicrjJLCJv StefeA^ovres" ideaGafieOa Trpcorrjv re /cat 

5 hevripav /cat TpirrjV ttoXlv, dAA?^Aajv, cos" olofjueda, rat? 

KaroLKtaeGLV e^^opuevas iv xpdv^v nvos jLtTy/ceatv dTrAerots", 

vw Se St) reTdprrj ng rjjJitv avrrj ttoXls, et 8e ^ovXeaOe, 

edvos T^/cet KaroLKit,6pi€v6v re ttotc /cat vuv KarcoKLGfjLevov. 

b e^ cSv OLTTOLVTajv et rt /cat (jwelvai hvvdpieOa ri re /caAois" "^ /xt) 

KarcpKLudrj, /cat iroXoi vopuoL gw^ovctlv avrcbv rd Gcpt,6pL€va 

Koi TTOLOi ^deipovGi rd ^Beipopbevaj /cat dvrt ttoIojv rroia 

fjLcraredevra evSaipiova ttoXlv d7T€pydt,OLr dv, cL MeytAAe 

5 T€ /cat KAetvta, TauTot St) rrdXiv olov ef dpx^js ripilv XeKreov, 

el pi^Tj Tt rots' elprjpbivois eyKaXovp,ev Aoyots*. 

ME. Et yow, cS ^eVe, rts' i^/xtv VTToaxoiro Oeos cas", eav 

C €7rt;)^et^7^crct>jLtev ro Sevrepov rfj rrjs vopbodeoias OKeifjeL, rcjv 

vvv elprjfjievajv Xoyojv ov ;)(€tpoi;s' ouS* eXdrrovs dKovoroixeda, 

fjLaKpdv dv eXdoifjiL eycoye, /cat /xot ^paxeV dv So^eiev rj vvv 

TTapovaa rfpuepa ytyveadai. /catrot ax^^dv y earnv rj e/c 

5 depivcjv els rd x^^l^^P^^d rod deov rpeTTO/xevov, 

A0. yiprj Srj ravra, cos eoLKeVy OKOTreiv. 

ME. lidvV pL€V OVV. 

A0. TevcopueOa Srj rats Stavotats' ev rep rdre xpovcp, 
ore AaKeSalpuajv puev /cat "Apyos" /cat Mecrcn^i^ /cat rd puera 
d rourcov VTTOX^Lpta rots irpoyovoLS vp^wv, co MeytAAe, cKavcos 
eyeyovec ro Se Srj puerd rovro eSo^ev aurots', ws ye Xeyerai 
ro rod pLvOov, rpLxfj ro orpdrevpia SiavetpLavras, rpeZs rroXeis 
KarocKL^eiVy "Apyos, M.eGOTJv7)Vj Aa/ceSat/xova. 
5 ME. Ildvv piev ovv. 

A0. Kat ^aoiXevs p^ev "Apyovs T'i]pLevos eylyvero, 
M.ea(njv7]s 3e Vipeo^ovrrjs, AaKeSalpuovos Se IlpOKXrjs /cat 
^vpvaOevrjS' 

ME. Yla>s ydp ov; 
10 A0. Kat Trdvres ^rj rovrois wpuoaav ol rore PorjdijaeLV, 

96 



N0M12N r 683 e 

edv TLg TTjv jSacrtAetav avrcov hia<j)d€ipr^. e 

ME. Tt ixriv; 

A0. BaortAeta Se KaraXveraiy c5 irpos Atos", tj /cat rts" 
ap;^-)^ TTCjjTTOTe KareXvdr], fjLCjv vtto tlvcov dXXojv tj a(f)cov av- 
Tojv; Tj vvvSt} iiiv, oXiyov efiTrpoadev tovtols TTepLrvxovres 5 
Tols XoyoiSt ovTCx) ravT eTlde/JLev, vvv 8* eTTtXeXijafxeda; 
ME. Kat TToJs; 

A0. OvKovv VVV 8rj fjidXXov ^epaiojorofjueda to tolovtov 
TTepLTVXovTes yap epyois yevofxevoiSy cos* eoiKev, eirl rov 
avTov Xoyov iXr^XvOa/jLev, cocrre ov Trepl k€v6v tl ^rjTT](70fJL€V 10 
[rov avTov Xoyov], dXXd irepl yeyovo^ re /cat exov dXijdeLav. 684 
yeyovev Srj raSe* jSacrtAetat rpets ^aoiXevofxevaig rroXeaiv 
rpiTTaZs wfJLoaav dXXijXais e/care/oat, Kara vofMOVs ovs edevro 
rod T€ dpx^LV /cat dp-)(€<jdai kolvovs, ol fjuev fJLrj ^laiorepav 
rrjv dpxrjv iTOirjueadaL Tvpo'Covros rov xP^vov /cat yevovs» 5 
ot 8e, ravra ifxrre^ovvrojv rwv dpxovrojv, fXTJre avrol rds 
^aoiXeias rrore KaraXvaetv fMrjr^ €7TLrpeip€LV iTTLX^LpovcrLV 
erepoLS, . ^orfi-qoeiv Se ^aGiXijg re ^aonXevacv dSiKovfJuevoig b 
/cat SijfjiOLSy /cat SrjfioL Sij/JLOis /cat ^aaiXevGLV dSt/cou/xevots". 
dp* ovx ovrois; 

ME. Ovroj ixkv ovv. 

A0. OifKovv ro ye fxeyLcirov raZs Karacrrdaeatv rcjv 5 
TToXireiiov VTTTJpxev rat? ev rats' rpial TToXeat vofioOerovfjie- 
vaL£y elre ol ^acnXrjs evofioderovv ctr' aAAot rives; 

ME. Yioiov; 

A0. To ^oTjdovs ye etvai rds Svo enl rrjv fJLuav del 
ttoXlv, rrjv rots redeiaiv vo/JbOig dTrecdovorav, 10 

ME. At^Aoi^. 

A0. Kat fjLTjv rovro ye ol ttoXXoI irpoGrdrrovGLV rots c 
vofjLoderaiSy ottojs roiovrovs OrjGovaiv rovs vofiovs ovs 
eKovres ol SrjfxoL /cat rd rrXrjdiq Se^ovrat, KaOdirep dv el rt? 
yvpLvaaraZs t) larpoZs Trpoardrroi fxed* rjSovrjs depaireveiv re 
/cat IdadaL rd depairevopLeva Gcofiara. 5 

ME. YLavrdTTaGi fxev ovv. 

A0. To Se y' ecrrlv dyaiTrjrov TroAAa/cts" el /cat ns fxerd 
XvTTTjs fJLTj fxeydXrjs Svvacro eue/crt/ca re /cat vytrj acLfiara 
dTTepyd^eadaL. 

ME. Tt fJi'qv; 10 

A0. Kat ToSe ye en roXs rore VTrrjpxev ov afiiKpov els d 

VOL. I 97 H 



684 d nAAT12N02 

paarwvrjv ttJs" Biaeojs twv vojjlcov. 
ME. To TTolov; 

A0. OvK rjv ToX^ voyLoOirais 'q fxeytcTTrj tcjv fJuefJupecDV 

5 LGorrjra avrocg riva KaracrKevd^ovcriv rijs ovaiaSy 'qTrep iv 

clAAt) vofJLoderovfJLevaLs rroXeGL TToXXals yiyveraiy idv ns 

^W!l yV^ '^^ KTrJGLV Kivelv kol xP^cDv hiaXvaLVy opwv cLs ovk 

av Swatro avev rovrcov yeviadai TTore to lgov LKavcos' cos" 

errfx^ipovvTi Srj vopLoderj] Kivelv rcjv tolovtcov tl nds aTTavra 

C XeycDV pLT] KiveXv rd OLKLvqra, Kal eTrapdrai yrjs re ava8a- 

afJiOV£ elar^yovfxevco Kal xp^^^ drroKOTrdgy oyar els dnopiav 

KadiaraaOaL Trdvr dvBpa, rols 8e Stj AojpievGi Kal rovd 

ovtcjos VTTTJpx^y KaXcos Kal dvepieaiJTCos, yrjv re dvafjL(f>La- 

5 ^rjTijrws hiaviixeadaiy Kal X/oea jxeydXa Kal TraXaid ovk tjv. 

ME. 'AXridrj. 

A0. n^ hrj TTore odv, (L dpiaroiy KaKCJS ovrcos avrols 
exajprjaev rj KaroLKiais re Kal vofModeaia; 
085 ME. rials' St) Kal ri pieix^opievos avrcov Xeyeis; 

A0. "On Tpicjv yevofievtov rwv olKi^aeojv rd Svo avrcov 
pieprj raxv rrjv re TToXireiav Kal rovs vofiovg SUcfydeipeVy rd 
Se ev fjiovov efxeiveVy rd rrjs vfjierepas TrdAecos'. 
5 ME. Ov rrdvv paSiOV epcoras. 

A0 . ' AAAa fJirjv Set ye rjpids rovro ev rw vvv aKorrovvrag 
Kal i^erd^ovras, Trepl vopnov 7rait,ovras rraiSidv Trpeo^vriKiqv 
aa)(f)povay SteXdelv rrjv oSov dXvTTCOSy cos ecfyafxev rjviKa 
D TjpxdfJieda Tropeveadai. 

ME. Tt fJi7]v; Kal TTOirjreov ye ws Xeye^s- 
A0. TtV ovv av GKeipLV KaXXlco TTOLrjcoIfjieda Trepl vofxcov 
7] rovrcov ol ravras StaKeKocrfji'iJKaGLV ; 7] TToXecov Trepl rivcov 
5 evhoKifxajrepcjov re Kal fiei^ovcov KarocKioecov aKOTroipLed^ av; 
ME. Ov pdhiov dvrl rovrcxjv erepas Xeyetv. 
A0. OvKovv on fiev Sievoovvro ye ol rore rrjv Kara- 
OKevrjv ravrrjv ov YieXoTvovvriacx} jxovov eaeadai ^orjSdv 
C iKavriVy CTX'^^dv SrjXoVy dXXd Kal roTs ''KXXr]aLv TTdoiv, ei 
rts rcjv ^ap^dpcov avrovs dScKoX, Kaddrrep ol Trepl rd "IXiov 
OLKovvres rdre, TTiarevovres rfj rcov ^Aodvplcov Swdfjuei rfj 
Trepl Ntvov yevopievrjy Bpaovvdixevoi rdv TrdXepLOV Tjyeipav 
5 rdv 6771 Tpoiav. rjv ydp en rd rrjs dpxrjs eKeivr^s o-p^T^/xa 
rd Gcp^dfjievov ov apuKpov KadaTrep vvv rdv p^eyav ^acnXea 
(l>o^ovjjLeda rjfJLeis, Kal rdre eKeCvTjv rrjv avaradeloav oxw 

98 



N0M12N r 685 c 

ra^LV iSeBiaav ol rore. /xeya yap eyKXrjfjLa tt/oo? avrovs 
rj rrjs Tpolas dXcuori^ to Sevrepov iyeyovcL- rrjs o.px^S yap d 
rrjs eKeivojv "^v fJLoptov. Trpos ^rj TauT* 9)V iravra 7] rod 
arparoTTeSov rod t6t€ hiavepLriOeioa els rpeis ttoXcls Kara- 
GKCvrj fjLLa VTTO ^acrtAecDV dS€X<f)a)v, 7ratSct»y Hpa/cAeous", 
/caAcDs", ^S" eSoAcet, dvrjvprjfievr] /cat KaraKeKoajJirjfjLevrj /cat 5 
8ia(f)€p6vTCx)9 TTJs inl rrjv Tpoiav a^t/co/xevTys". Trpcorov pukv 
yap Tovs 'H/aa/cActSas" rcbv YieXoTTihcjv apbeivovs rjyovvro 
dpxovrcov dpxovras ex^LV, eVetr' av ro arrparoTreSov rovro 
rod €771 Tpouav a0t/co/xeVou hia(f)epeLV irpos aperi^v' vevLKi)' e 
Acevat yap tovtovs, r)TT9]adaL 8' vtto tovtojv iKeivovs, *A)(aLovs 
ovras VTTO Aajptajv. dp* ovx ovrwg olofxeda /cat Ttvt Stavota 
ravrr) KaraaK€vdt,€o6 ai rovs rore; 

ME. Udvv fJL€V ovv. 5 

A0. OvKovv /cat TO ^e^aiojs OLeaOai ravd^ e^eiv clkos 
avTOvg /cat xpovov riv* av ttoXvv pLevecv, are KeKOLVOJvrjKoras 686 
pi€v 7ToXX(x)v TTOvojv /Cat Kivhvvojv aXXr^Xois y VTTO yivovs he 
evos Tojy ^acnXeatv dheX<j>(x)V ovrojv SiaKeKoafjirjadaL, Trpos 
rovTOLS 8* €TL Kal TToXXoLs fxavTeGL KexfiTjpievovs elvai rols 
re dXXoLS /cat tco AeX<f)LKcp 'ATToAAoji^t; 5 

ME. Uojs 8' ovK eLKos; 

A0. Tavra Srj rd p,eydXa ovtcjjs TTpoaSoKWfJbeva SieTrraro, 
(x)s eoLKe, Tore Ta^y, ttXtjv OTrep elTTOfxev vvvSr) apuKpov 
fjLepovs Tov TTepl Tov vfierepov tottov, /cat rovro Srj TTpos rd b 
Svo fJiepr) TToXefjLovv ov TTcoTTore rreTTavrai /xe;^pt rd vvv eTrel 
yevofjLevrj ye rj rore Stdvoia /cat (Tf/x<^6t>v7^cracra els ev, dv- 
VTToararov av riva Svvafjuv eaxe /cara TToXepuov, 

ME. Hcjs ydp ov; 5 

A0. Ucos ovv /cat TTTJ SicoXero; dp ovk d^iov eTTiGKOTretv 
rr^XiKOvrov /cat roiovrov avarrjjjia T^ns vore rvx^i 8Le(f>6eLpe; 

ME. TtXoXfj ydp ovv 817 ns av dXX6<Ge> gkottcjv, t) vofjLovs 
7^ TToXcrelas dXXas deaaairo acp^ovaas /caAa /cat pueydXa C » 
TTpdyfiara rj /cat rovvavriov SiacfideLpovaas to TrapaTrav, el 
dfieXi^GeLe rovrcov, 

A0. Tovro fjLev dpa, d)s eoiKeVy evrvx^J^S ttojs epL^e^ij- 
Kafiev ye els riva crKeipiv iKav^v. 5 

ME. Udvv fJLev ovv. 

A0. "^Ap* ovv, a> davjJLaoTLe, XeX'qOap.ev dvOpajTrot TTavres, 
/cat rd vvv Srj rjfjLelSi olofjuevoc fxev eKaarore tl KaXov opdv 

99 



686 c nAAT12N02 

TrpdyfJia yevofxevov koX Oavfjuaara oiv ipyaadfievov, et rt? oipa 
d rjTncTT'qdrj KaXojg avTW ')(prJGdai Kara nva rporroVy to Se vvv 
ye rjfjiel^ rax o.v to-cos" Trepl rovro avro ovr* opdws SiavooC- 
fieda ovT€ Kara <f)VGLVy Kai Brj Kal rrepl ra aAAa Travres 
Trdvra, irepl Sv oiv ovtcd StavorjOdxiLV ; 
5 ME. AeyeLs Se Srj tl, Kal Trepi rivos croi <j)a)ixev pLaXiur* 
elprjad ai tovtov rov \6yov; 

A0. ^Qyade, Kal avros e/xaurou vvvSr] KareyeXaaa, 

dTTO^Xeijjas yap Trpos tovtov tov gtoXov ov irepi StaXeyo- 

jxeda, eSo^e /jlol TrdyKaXos t€ etvat Kal OavpuaaTov <dv> 

lo KTTJpia TTapaTTeaeXv rots' "EiXXrjGLVy OTrep eiTTOV, e'i tls oipa 

e aura) t6t€ KaXojs expyjo'aTO. 

ME. OvKovv €V Kal i^ovTcos vovv av T€ rravra etTies Kal 
iTrrjveaapiev rjp^els; 

AO. "Igojs' ivvooj ye p,rjv cos ttols, os av tSrj tl pueya 

5 Kal SvvapiLv e^ov ttoXXtjv Kal pwp^-qVy evdvs eirade tovto, (hs 

evTTep errioTaLTO 6 KeKTrjpievos avTCo ;3^/37^(7^at tolovtco t€ ovtl 

Kal TrjXiKOVTa), davpLauT* av Kal TroXXd KaTepyacrdpievos 

evSaipiovoL. 

687 ME. OvKovv opdov Kal TOVTo; Tj TTOJs Xeyeis; 

A0. S/coTret hj) 7TOL ^XeTTOJV 6 TOV eiraivov tovtov Trepl 

eKduTov Tidepievos opOcjs Xeyei' TrpcoTOV Se Trepl avTov tov 

vvv Xeyopuevov , irays, el Acara TpoTTOV rjTnaTTjdrjo'av ra^at to 

5 GTpaTOTrehov ol TOTe Sta/cocr/xowres", tov Kaipov ttcxjs dv 

eTVXpv; dp* ovk el avveaTrjadv re da(f)aXd)s avTO SUaw^ov 

Te els TOV del xpdvov, ojGTe avTovs re eXevdepovs elvai Kal 

dXXojv dpxovTas cSv ^ovXyjOeXev, Kal oXa>s ev dvdpcoTTOis Trdat 

b /cat "EAAT^crt Kal ^ap^dpois Trparretv ort emdvpiolev avTol 

re Kal ol eKyovoi — pLcov ov tovtcov X^P^^ eTiaivotev dv; 

ME. Yidvv pL€V ovv. 

A0. ^Ayo' ovv Kal OS dv ISwv ttXovtov piiyav rj rt/xds* 

• 5 Siacfyepovaas yevovs, r) Kau otlovv tojv tolovtcvv, eiTTj) raura 

TavTa, TTpos TOVTO ^XeTTOJV elnev, c5? Sta tovto aura) yevqao- 

pueva wv dv eTndvpLfj irdvTa tj ra TrAe terra Kal oaa d^toSrara 

Xoyov; 

ME. "Eot/ce yovv. 
C A0. ^epe So^, TrdvTCov avdpcoTTOJv €gtl kolvov eTndvpLTjpLa 
ev TL TO vvv VTTO TOV Xoyov 8r]Xovpi€vov [d)s avTos (fyrjaiv 6 
Xoyos]; 

100 



NOMftN r 687 c 

ME. To TToZov; 

A0. To Kara ttjv rrjs avrov ^vx^js eTrtVaftv ra yiyvo- 5 
\L€va ylyveadai, fidXiara fiev airavra, el Se firj, ra ye 
dvOpcoTTLva. 

ME. Tt fJLTjv; 

A0. OvKovv eVctVep j8oyAo/xe^a rravres to tolovtov 
del, TratSes" re ovres koL dvhpes Trpea^vraL, rovr avro /cat 10 
evxoifJLed^ av dvayKaicos Sta reXovs ; 

ME. Yioas S' ou; 

A0. Kat pLrfV TOLS ye ^tAot? ttou GVvevxolfJLed* dv ravra d 
(XTre/o eKelvoL eavroZuiv, 

ME. Tt ^771/; 

A0. OtAos" jJiev i)6s TTarpi, irals cov dvSpL 

ME. Ucos S' ovj ^ ^ „ , , 5 

A0. Kat fJLTjv (Jjv y d ttois evx^^ai eavrw ytyvecrdaiy 
TToXXd d TTarrjp direv^air dv roZs deols /xTySa/xtos" Kara ras 
Tov veos evxds yiyveadai. 

ME. "Orav dvoT^ros cov /cat en veog evx^lTaLy Xeyeis; 

A0. Kat orav ye d Trarrjp cjv yepojv r^ /cat G(f)oSpa vea- 10 
vtas", (JL7]Sev rojv KaXcjv /cat rchv St/cata>v yiyvaiGKCJV, evx'^Tai e 
fjbdXa TTpodvfJLCJS ev TradrjpLaaiv dheX<j)oZs cjv rols yevojJievoLs 
SrjGel TTpos TOV Svarvxdjs reXevrijaavra ^iTTTToXvrov, d Se 
Trals yLyv(x)GK7], rore, So/cets", Trat? irarpl avvev^erai; 

ME. lAavddvcj d XeyeLS» Xeyeiv yap jjuol So/cets- a>s" ov 5 
rovro evKreov ovhe eireiKreoVy erreodau iravra rfj eavrov ^ov- 
Xtjaet, rrjv ^ovX-qaiv Sc fJbrjSev pidXXov rfj eavrov (f)pov'qa€(,' 
rovro Se /cat ttoXlv /cat eVa rjfjidjv eKaarov /cat eu;\;€0-^at helv 
/cat UTTevheiv, ottws vovv e^eu. 

A0. Nat, /cat Srj /cat TToAtrt/cdv ye dvhpa vofJio6err]v cos 688 
del Set Trpos rovro ^Xerrovra riOevai rag rd^eis rcov voficov 
avros re efjLvqGdrjv, /cat vfjuds eTTavafjutpivrjaKco — /car apxoLS €t 
IJLeijLvrjp.e6a ra Xex^evra — ort to fiev G(j)d)v "^v irapaKeXev/JLa 
d)S xpea>v etrj rov dyadov vojJLoderrjv rrdvra TToXefiov x^P^^ 5 
TO, vdjJLLfjLa ridevat, ro Se epuov eXeyov on rovro fxev irpos 
fjLLav dperrjv ovadjv rerrdpa>v KeXevoL rideadaL rovs vopiovs, 
Scot 8e St) TTpos irdoav jxev ^Xerreiv, jjudXiora 8e /cat Trpos b 
Trpdinqv rrjv rrjs avfJLTTdarjs rjyepidva dperrjs, (f^povriGLS S €t7y 
rovro /cat vovs Kal So^a fier epojrds re /cat eTndvfJLtas rovrois 
eTTOjJLevrjs . rJKec 8r] irdXiv d Xoyos els ravrov, /cat d Xeyojv 

101 



58 b nAATi2N02 

5 iyoj vvv Xeyoj ttolXlv dnep rore, el /X€V jSouAecr^e, chs Trai^cov, 

€1 5*, d)£ GTTOvMl^ojv, OTL St^ ^TjixL €vxfj XP^^T^at a(j>aX€p6y 

elvai vovv ixr) K€KT7]fJi€V0V, aAAa rdvavria rat? ^ovXiqaeaLV 

C 01 yiyveadai. (jTTOvSd^ovra 8' et jite ndevai ^ovXeaOe, 

rid ere' ttolvv yap ovv TrpoahoKCJ vvv vjjids evprjoreiv, ™ Xoyw 

eTTOfJievovs ov oXlyov epbTTpoade TTpovdijxeda, rrjs tcov ^acn- 

Xicov T€ <f)9opds KOI oXov rod hiavorjp.aros ov 8etAtW ovaav 

5 Tr)v alriav, ovS' on rd jrepl rov TroXepuov ovk rjTTLaravTO 

dpxovres re /cat ovs TTpoarJKev dpx^odai, rfj Xonrfj 8e Trdajj 

KaKia hL€<j)9appbiva, koI fidXicrra rfj irepl^ rd fxeyiora rchv 

d dvdpcjTTLVOJV TTpayfJidrojv dfiadia. ravr ovv ojs ovrw yeyove 

7T€pl rd rore, koL vvv, el' ttov, yiyverai, koL is tov eVetra 

Xpovov OVK dXXojs GVjjLprjaerai, idv povXr^aOey 7T€ipaaop,ai 

ld)V Kard rov i^rjg Xoyov dvevpiaKeiv re /cat vp.lv h-qXovv 

5 Kard hvvapnv ojs ovaiv ^tAots". 

KA. Aoyo) jLtev roivvv g€, (L |eVe, eiraiveZv eTraxdearepov, 
epycp 8e a^oSpa eVatveao/xe^a- 7Tpodvp.a>s ydp rots Xeyo- 
p,evois eTTaKoXovdrjcropiev, iv ots o ye eXevOepttiq eTraiVwv 
/cat jLti7 /xaAtcrr' earlv /cara^avT^S". 
e ME. "AptCTT*, cL KAetvta, /cat TTOLcopuev a Xeyets. 
KA. "Eorai ravr a, idv Oeos iOeXr]. Xeye p,6vov.^ 
AG). OajLtev Stj vvv, KaO' oSov lovres rrjv Xoltttjv rov 
Xoyov, rrjv pieyiar-qv dpuaBiav rore iKeivrjv rr)V Svvap.LV 
5 diToXeaai /cat vvv ravrov rovro Tre^vKevai rroielv, ware rov 
ye vopioderrjv, el rovd^ ovrcos e^et, Trecpareov rats iroXeaiV 
(fypovrjCTLV piev oarjv Svvarov ipLTTOtelv, rrjv 8' dvoiav on 
pudXiGra i^aipelv. 

KA. A-^Aov. ^ ^ 

689 A0. Tis ovv 7) pLeyiarr] hiKaiws dv Xeyoiro dp^aOia; 
GKOTTetre el avvSoiei /cat a<l>a)v Xeyop^evov iycb p,ev Sr] rrjv 
roidvhe ridep^ai. 

KA. Ilotav; ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ / \- 

5 A0. 1'r)V orav rep n So^av KaXov rj dyaOov etvat p.r] (piXfj 
rovro dXXd pnafj, ro 8e TTOvrjpov /cat dSuKOV Sokovv etvat 
^tA^ re /cat daTrdl^rjraL. ravrrjv rrjv hia^wviav XvTTrjs^re 
Kalrjhovrjs TTpos rrjv Kard Xoyov So^av dp,adiav <j)y]pX elvai 
rrjv iaxdrrjv, p.eyiorrjv 8e, on rov ttXtjOovs icrrljrjs ipvxrjs'^ 
b ro ydp XvTTOvpievov /cat -qhopievov avrrjs onep Srjp.6s re /cat 
ttXtjOos TToXews ianv. orav ovv i7n(jrrip.aLs rj Boiacs rj Xoyo) 

102 



N0M12N r 689 b 

ivavTLOJTaL, tols (f>v(j€L apxt-Kolg, rj ^vx^t rovro avoiav irpoG' 
ayopevco, TToAecos" re, orav ap^ovaiv /cat vojjlols firj 7Teidr]Tai 
TO TrXrjdoSi ravTOV, /cat Sr) /cat ivos dvSpos, oirorav /caAot ev 5 
ipvxfj Adyot ivopres jJirjSev ttolojglv irXeov dAAa Sry rovrois 
irdv rovvavriov y ravras Trdcras dp^adias rds TrAi^/x/xeAecrTaTa? 
eycoy* dv deurjv TroXecos re /cat ivos eKdarov tcqv ttoXltcov, aXX c 
ov ras" rojv Srjp^LOvpycov, el dpa p,ov KarapLavOdvere, co ^eVot, 
o Xeyo). 

KA. MavddvopL€V T€, (jj (J>lX€, /cat avyx<Jt^povpL€v a 
Aey^ts". 5 

A0. TouTo pLev Toivvv ovroj Keuadoj SeSoypueuov /cat Xeyo- 
pLCVOVf (x)S rots' ravr* dpuadaivovGL rcov ttoXltujv ovhev €7TL- 
Tp€7TT€ov dp-)(f]S e-)(ppi€vov, Kol (jj£ dpiaOicjLV 6v€lSlgt€0V, dv 
/cat irdw XoyiariKOL re cocn /cat irdvra rd Ko/jufja /cat ocra 
TTpos rd^os TTjs ^^XV^ Tre^v/cdra SLa7T€7TOVT]pb€vot airavra, d 
TOWS' §€ TovvavTLOv ^xovTas Tovrcov (Ls o'o<f)ovs T€ TTpoaprjreoVy 
dv /cat TO XeyopLcvov pb'qTe ypdpLpuara pun^re velv iTncrrajvrai, 
/cat Tas" dpxds Soreov cos" €pL(f>po(Jiv . ttcjs ydp dv, Jj ^iXoiy 
dvev ovpLcjxjjvLas yivoir* dv ^povqaeoys /cat to apuLKpoTaTov 5 
ctSos"; ovK eoTLV, dXX rj /caAAtari] /cat pueyiaTr) tojv (Jvp,(j)co- 
VLCov pLeyLGTT] St/catdrar' dv XeyoiTO ao(f)La, t^s" o /xev /cara 
Adyov ^cSv pb€Toxo£, 6 Se ciTroAetTrd/xet'os' olKo<f)d6pos /cat Trept 
TrdAtv ovSapLTJ GCOT-qp dXXd irdv TOVvavTiov dpLaOalvcov et? 
TavTa €KdaTOT€ (f)av€LTaL. TavTa puev odv, Kadairep eXiropbev e 
dpTt, XeXeypueva Ted-qTCx) TavTTj. 
KA. Keta^co ya/3 ouv. 

A0. "ApxovTas Sc 81^ /cat dpxop^dvovs dvayKoiov ev rats 
TToXeaiv etval rrov. 5 

KA, Tt piijv; 

A0. Etei'* aftco/xara Se 8t^ tou re dpX'^f'V /cat dpx^f^Oai 69O 
TTO ta €CTTt /cat TToaa, ev re TToXeaiv pueydXats /cat apuLKpaZs €v re 
oiKiais djaavTOJs ; dp* ovxl ev jitev rd t€ rraTpos /cat pbrjTpog; 
/cat oAoiS" yoveas eKyovojv dpx^iv a^tco/xa opOov navTaxov dv 
€trj; ^ ^ 5 

KA. Kat pudXa. 

A0. TouTO) Se y€ eTTopuevov yevvaiovs dyevvojv dpx^LV 
/cat TptTov eTL TOVTOLs ovveTTeTai TO TTpea^vTepovs p^ev dpx^tv 
Setv, veojTepovs Se dpx^crdai, 

KA. Tt /xtJv; 10 

103 



690 b nAATONOS 

b A0. Tiraprov 8' av hovXovs fiev dpx^adaij Seanoras Se 
dpx^iv. 

KA. IIcDs' yap ov; 

A0. UefJLTTTOV ye ot/xat to KpeLrrova /xev dpx^i'V, rov 
5 'qTTOJ Se dpx^fjSaL. 

KA. MaAa ye avay/catov dpxrjv €Lp7]Ka9. 
A0. Kat TrXelarrjv ye ev GVjJiTTauiv rols ^coois ovoav /cat 
/cara (fyvaiv, ws 6 Qrj^aios e^iq irore UivSapo^. to Se 
fjLeyiGTOv, COS cot/cev, a^ta>/xa eKrov av yiyvoirOy eTreo^at /xev 
lo Toi^ dveTTLGTrjixova KeXevov, rov 8e ^povovvra r^yeZudai re koI 
C dp)(€iv. KairoL tovto ye, c5 HiVSape ao(f)a)Tar€, gx^^ov ovk av 
TTapd (f)vaLV eycoye (j^airjv ylyveadaLy Kara (f)vaLV Se, rrjv rod 
vofJLOV eKovrcov dpx^v dAA' ov ^iaiov 7T€<j)VKvZav, 
KA. ^Opdorara Aeyet?. 
5 A0. S€0(f)LXrj 8e ye /cat evrvxy] nva Xeyovres i^Sofjurjv 
dpxrjVi etV KXrjpov nva TTpodyofxeVy /cat Aa;\;^'^'^^ /^^^ o^/op^etv, 
SvaKXrjpovvra Se aTnovra dpx^c^Oac to St/catoTttTOv etvat 
(j)ajji€v. 

KA. ^AXrjdeGrara Xeyeis. 

d A0. ** 'Opas Sij," (l)atjjL€v dv, '' cS vopuodira," Trpos nva 

Trau^ovres rcov iirl vofxojv deaiv lovnov paStajs", ** oca eoTt 

TT/oos" dpxovrag d^LcofjiaTa, /cat oVt irecjiVKOTa Trpos dXXrjXa 

ivavricDs; vvv yap Srj ardaeajv 7T7]yrjv nva dvrjvpiJKaiJiev 

5 r)fjL€LS, rjv Set oe OcpaTreveLV. Trpwrov Se pueO^ rjfjidjv dvddKeipaL 

TTOJS re /cat Tt Tvapd ravra dfiaprovres ol Trepi re "Apyos /cat 

M.eacFTJvrjv ^aaiXrjs avrovs dfia /cat rrjv rcov 'EAAt^vojv 

C SvvajjLLV, ovaav Oavfiaarrjv ev rep rore xpo^<pt hLe<j>6eipav. dp* 

OVK dyvoTjoavres rov 'HotoSoi^ opBorara Xeyovra cos to 

^fiLGV rod TTavros TToXXaKis earl TrXeov; [oTroTav fj ro fiev 

oXov Xapi^dveiv ^rjfXLCoSes, to S' rjpbiav fierpiov, rore ro 

5 puerpLov rov dpuerpov TrXeov rjyi^aaro, dpueivov ovx^^povos.] " 

KA. ^Opdorard ye. 

A0. Ylorepov ovv olop^eOa Trepi ^aacXeas rovr^ eyycyvo- 
fxevov eKaarore hLa(f>Oeipeiv rrporepoVy tj ev rolcnv SrjpLOLs; 
091 KA. To piev eLKOs /cat ro ttoXv, ^aaiXecov rovr^ elvat 
voarjpia VTre pr](/)dvcos ^covrcov Sta rpv<j)ds. 

A0. OvKOvv SrjXov ws TTpdJrov rovro ol rore ^aaLXrjs 

euxoVy TO TrXeoveKreiv rcov redevrcov vopLCov, /cat o Xoyco re 

5 /cat opKCp eTTTiveaaVy ov (Tvve(f)covr]aav avroZs, dXXd rj Sta- 

104 



NOMfiN r 691 a 

(fxjovla, a>s" rjfJL€Lg (f)afjL€V, ovaa dfjuaOia fieyLarrj, ooKovaa oe 
ao(f)ia, TTOVT* e/cetva 8ta nXrjfjifjLeXeLav /cat afiovaiav ttjv 

TTLKpaV 8i€<f)d€Lp6V ; 

KA. "Eot/ce yovv. 

A0. Etei^* Tt St) tov vofJLoOerrjv cSet rdre ndevra ev- b 
Xa^r]6rjvaL rovrov Trepl rod nddovs rrjg yeveoeojs ; dp (b 
irpos deojv vvv puev ovSev GO(f)6v yvcovai tovto oi5S eiTreZv 
XOiXeTTov, el 8e Trpo'CSetv rjv t6t€, aocfxxjrepos dv rjv r]fjLOJV o 
TTpo'CScov; ^ 

ME. To TTOiov Srj Xiyeis; 

A0. EtV TO yeyovos Trap' vpLiv, (L MeytAAe, eanv vvv 
ye KanSovra yvcovai, /cat yvovra elireZv paSiov, 6 rore eSec 
yiyveadai. 

ME. Ha(l>eGTepov en Xeye. 10 

A0. To roivvv aa<f)e(jTaTOv dv elr] to TOLovSe. 

ME. To TToZov; 

A0. 'Eai^ TLS pieil^ova 8tSa> rot? eXdTTOcn [Swa^ti^] q 
TTapels TO fieTpLOV, ttXolols re tarta /cat acofJiaaLV Tpo(l)rjv 
/cat iJjv)(aZs dp')(ds, dvaTpeireTai ttov irdvTa, /cat e^v^pi^ovTa 
Ta /juev els voaovs 6eZ, to. 8' ets" eKyovov v^pecos aSt/ctW. 
Tt ow 87^ TTore Xeyopuev ; dpd ye to Toiovhey <hs Ovk cW, ^ 
c5 <j>iXoi dvhpes, dvrjTrjg 4^yx^^ <f)vais tJtls iroTe 8w7^o"erat 
TTjv pLeyiaTiTjv ev dvdpwTTOLs dp)(r]v (pepeiv vea /cat dvvTrev- 
Ovvos, iooTe pLT) TTJs fJLeyLGTTjg voGov dvoias TrXrjpcodeZGa d 
avTTJs TTjv SidvoLav, fxZcros e')(eiv Trpos tojv iyyvTaTa <f)LXa)v, 
o yevofjbevov Ta)(v hie(j)deLpev avTrjv /cat jrdaav ttjv hvvajxiv 
rj<f)dvLGev avTrjs; tout' ovv evXa^rjdrjvai yvovTas to fxeTpiov 
fieydXcov vofiodeTcov . d)s ovv Stj TOTe yevofievov, vvv eGTLV r 
fieTpLcoTaTa TOirdGai' to 8 eocKev etvai — 

ME. To TToZov ; 

A0. Qeos etvai KrjSopievos vfjLCJV tls, os Ta pueXXovTa 
TTpoopojVy SlSvfjLov vfiZv (f)VTevGas Tr)v Twv ^aGtXeojv yeveGiv 
€/c pLovoyevovs y els to pLeTpiov pidXXov GVveGTetXe . /cat pieTa e 
TOVTO eVt (f>VGLS TLS dvdpojTTivr] pLepLeLypLevT] Beia tlvI Swdpiei, 
KaTihovGa vpLOJV TTjV dpx'Tjv (J)XeypLaLVOVGav eTt, pbeuyvvGLV ttjv 
/caTo, yrjpas Ga)(f)pova Svvapav ttj /caTo, yevos avOdSei pcopur}, 592 
TTjv Tcbv OKTO) /cat euKOGL yepovTCDV lG6iljr](f)ov els Ta pueyiGTa 
Tjj TOJV ^aGiXecov TroLifjGaGa Swdpuei. 6 8e TpiTOs gcxjttjp 
vpuZv eTL GTTapyojGav /cat dvpovpuevrjv ttjv dp)(7]v opdjv, olov 

105 



692 a HAATflNOS 

5 ipaXiov eve^aXev avrfj rrjv rojv i(f)6pojv Svvajjiiv, iyyvs rrj^ 
KXrjpcoTTJs ayayojv Swdfjuecos' Kal Kara 8t) tovtov rov \6yov 
7] ^aaiXeua Trap* vfjulVj i^ (Lv eSet crvfifJieLKros yevofievr] /cat 
fjuerpov exovua, aajdeZaa avrrj acjrripias toZs d'AAots" yiyovev 

b atrta. iirei eTrl ye TrjfjLevco Kal K.p€(j<f)6i>rrj Kal roXs rore 
vojjLoOerais, OLnves dpa rjaav vopLoOerovvres , ouS' r] 'Apt- 
(jToS'^piov jJLeplg idcodr) ttot dv — ov yap uKavcos rjaav vopuo- 
Oeoias efjUTrecpot,' cr;^eSov yap ovk dv ttot* chi^drjcrav opKOLs 

5 fJLerpLaorai ijjvx^v veav, Xa^ovcrav dp^rji^ €$ '^S Swarov rjv 
rvpavvLoa yeveauat — vvv o o Ueos eoeigev ouav €0€l /cat 
Set 8rj T'^v fxevovaav /xaAtcrra dp)(rjv ylyveGdat. to Se Trap' 

C TjfJLOJv yiyvcocTKeadaL raura, oirep ecTTOv ejuLTTpoadev, vvv p^ev 
y€v6p,€Vov ovSev GO(f)6v — e/c yap irapaheiyp^aTOS opdv yeyo- 
voTos ovhev p^^aAeTTov — el 8' rjv tls npoopcbv TOTe raura /cat 
hvvdpievos /xerptao-at rds" dp^ds Kal piiav e/c Tpidjv TroLTJcraf,, 

5 ra re voiqdevTa dv /caAd TOTe irdvTa diTeGioae Kal ovk dv 
7TOT€ 6 IlepaiKos errl ttjv 'EAAdSa ouS' dAAos" ovSet? (JtoXos 
dv a)pp,7](7€, KaTa^povTjaas ws ovtcjov rjp^djv ^pa^eo^ d^icov. 
KA. ^ AXt] 6rj Xey€L£. 

d A0. Alaxpojg yovv rj/jLVvavTO avTOV^, co KXeivla. to S 
alaxpov Xeyoj ov^ ojs ov viKcovTes ye at TOTe Kal /caret yrjv 
Kal /caret OdXaTTOV KaXds veviKTjKacn fid^as' dXXd 6 <j)ii)p.i 
alcrxpov tot etvat, ToSe Xeyoj, to rrpcJoTOV p,ev eKeivojv tojv 

5 TToXeojv Tpiajv ovuojv /xtW virep Trfs ^EAAdSos" d/xuvat, toj 
he hvo /ca/ccDs" ovtws elvai Ste^^ap/xeVa, cuare r] fiev /cat 
AaKeSaifjLova SteKcoXvev eirapivveLV avTrj, TToXe/JUOVGa avTTJ 
/card KpaTOs, rj 8* av TrpcoTevovcra ev toZs t6t€ xP^^^ls rots' 

e Trept TTjv ScavopLijv, r] Trepl to "A.pyos, 7TapaKaXovp,evr) a/xf- 
veLV Tov ^dp^apov ovd^ vm^Kovaev ovt* 7Jp,vvev. TToXXd Se 
Xeyojv dv rt? Td totc yevofxeva Trepl eKeivov tov TToXep^ov 
TTJs 'EAAdSo? ouSa/xcus" evax'^jP'Ova dv KaTrjyopoZ' ovh av 

5 dpLVvaodai ttjv ye 'EAAdSa Xeycov opdcbs dv Aeyot, dAA el 
p,r] TO re ^Adrjvalojv Kal to Aa/ceSat/xovtcov Kocvfj hiavorjpLa 
693 rjp.vvev TTjv eTnovaav SovXelav, gx^Sov dv tJStj TrdvT rjv /xe- 
/xety/xeVa Td tojv ^^XXijvcov yevrj ev dAAT^Aots", /cat ^dp^apa 
ev "EAAT^CTt /cat 'EAAi^vt/cd ev ^ap^dpots", Kaddrrep a>v Hepaai 
TVpavvovGL Td vvv BiaTTe(j)0p7]p,eva Kal avp.TTecf>opr]p,eva /ca/cdis" 

5 [eCTTrap/xeVa] /carot/cetrat. raur*, c5 KAetvta /cat MeytAAe, 
exop^ev eTTiTipidv toZs re TidAat TroAtrt/cots' Xeyop^evoLs Kat 

106 



NOMfiN r 693 a 

vofxodirais koI toIs vvv, iva ras atrtas" avrajv ava^rjrovvreg , 
dvevplaKcofiev rl irapa ravra eSet Trparreiv dXXo' otov Srj t) 
Kal TO TTapov eLTTO/mev, cus" dpa ov Set /xeyaAa? OLpxo-s ovS 
av d/jLeiKTOvs vopLoOerelv, Stavorjdevra^ to TOiovSe, otl ttoAlv 
iXevdepav re elvai Set /cat €ix<j>pova /cat iavTTJ <f>iXr]Vy /cat 
Tov vopioOeTOVVTa Trpos raura ^XiirovTa Set vofioOeTeiv. fxr] 5 
davfjudacofjiev Se et TroAAa/cts" yjSr] irpodifxevoi arra, €ip7]H;afX€V 
OTL TTpos ravra Set vo/jLodeTeXv ^XiirovTa tov vofJLodeTJjVy 
ra Se irpoTeOivTa ov raura T^/xti^ ^atVerat €KdGTOT€' dXXa C 
dvaXoyl^eadai XPV> oTav npos to o(x>(j)povelv ^cD/xev Seti' 
/SAeVetv, -^ 77/00? (fypovrjGLV tj <j)iXiav, (hs ea^' ovtos 6 ukottos 
ovx ere/oos" dAA' d aurds", /cat aAAa Si] 77oAAa Ty/xas" rotavra 
ci]/ yiyvrjTai po^/xara ^9) Staraparrerco. 5 

KA. rietpacrd/xe^a Trotelv ovtcjs iiraviovTes tovs Xoyovs' 
/cat wv St) rd Trept ri^S" ^tAtas" re /cat cfipovqaecos /cat iXev- 
depias, TTpos OTL ^ovXoiievos e/xeAAe? Aeyetv Seti' GTOxdt^eadaL 
TOV vofjLoOeTTjV, Xiy€. d 

A0. "Akovgov Sij vvv. elalv 7toXlt€l6jv olov /xT^repes" Suo 
Tivisy i^ (hv rds" aAAas" yeyovevac Xeycov dv rt? opdojs XeyoL, 
/cat rT^i' jLtei^ irpoaayopeveiv ixovapx^o-v opdov, ttjv S* au St^- 
[xoKpaTiaVy /cat rT^s" /xev rd ne/ocrdjp' yevog dKpov ^x^iv, Trjs 5 
Se TjpLds' at S d'AAat crp^eSdi^ dnaaai, Kaddirep elirov, e/c 
rourcDV etcrt StaTreTTOt/ctA/xeVat. Set So) ow /cat di^ay/catov 
fjL€TaXap€LV dpL(j)oZv TOVTOiVy eiTrep iXevOepia t eWat /cat 
<f>LXia )Lterd (f)pov7^a€OJS' o Sr) ^ouAerat 7y/xtv d Adyos Trpocr- C 
rdrreti', Aeya)v cos" ou/c dv rroTe tovtojv ttoXls dpioipos yevo- 
{JLevTj TToXiTevOrjvat Swatr' dv /caAco?. 

KA. Hoi? ydp dV; 

A0. *H fjiev TOLVVV TO pLOvapx^Kov, rj Se to iXevOepov 5 
ayaTTT^CTacra fJL€L^6vcos rj eSet p^ovov, ouSerepa rd pieTpta 
K€KT7]TaL TO-VTWVy at Se vpueTepaL, rj re AaKCoviKr) /cat Kpr]- 
TiKrjy puaXXov ^AOrjvaXoi Se /cat Ilepcrat rd /xev irdXai ovto) 
TTOJs, TO vvv Se -i^rroj^. rd S* atrta SUXdajpLev 7^ ydp; 694 

KA. ndvrcos', €t ye nov pLeXXopuev o irpovOepueda Trepaiveiv. 

A0. ^AKOvojpLev Srj. Hepcrat ydp, ot€ piev to jjieoov 
fidXXov SouAetas" re /cat iXevdepias rjyov irrl K.vpoVy TrpcjTOV 
jjLev iXevdepoL iyevovTOy eVetra Se dAAoJi^ ttoXXcov SecTTj-drat. 5 
eXevdepuas yap dpxovTes /xeraStSdvres" dpxopLevois /cat €7Tt 
TO taov dyovT€s, pidXXov ^iXoi re rjaav arpartcDrat crparij- 

107 



94 b nAATi]N02 

b yoLS /cat 7rpo6vfjiov£ avrovg iv rols Kivhvvois irapeixovro' /cat 
€t TLS CLV (f>p6vLfio9 rjv iv avTols Koi ^ovXeveiv Svvaros, ov 
(j)dov€pov Tov ^aaikecxjs ovros, hihovros Se Trapprjaiav /cat 

TtjLtOJVTOS' rOV? €LS TL SvvafJL€VOV? OVpL^OvXe'UeiV , KOLVr]V TTjV TOV 

^ (f)pov€LV et's" TO fxiaov Trapelx^ro SvvapiLV, /cat Trdvra Stj rore en- 
ihwKev avTols hi eXevdepiav re /cat <j)iXiav /cat vov Koivcoviav . 
KA. "Eot/ccV yi TTCJS TO, Xeyo/jLeva ovrco yeyovevai. 

Q A0. Hfj Srj ovv TTore dTTwXero eirl K.afjL^vaov /cat ttolXlv 
€7tI Aap€LOV ax^hov iorcodrj; ^ovXeade olov pbavreia hiavoi)- 
devres xpco^e^a; 

KA. Oe/oet yovv rjfJLLV oKeifjiv xou €<^' oirep (LpjjLTJKapiev. 

c A0. Mavrevofjiai Stj vvv rrepi ye Ys^vpov, rd jxkv dXX 
avTOV Grpanqyov re dyaOov elvai /cat (J)lX67toXlv, TratSetas" 
8e opdi^s ovx rjf^Oat, to TrapdiraVy olKOVopiia re ovhev tov vovv 

7TpO(J€OXQK€VaL. 

KA. IIcDs" hr] TO TOLOVTOV (f)6jfji€V ; 

d AS. "Eot/cev €/c V€OV GTpaTeveadai Sta /Stou, rats' yv- 
vaL^lv TTapahovs tovs vratSas* Tp€(f)€iv. at 8e cos" evSac/JLOvas 
avToijs e/c tcoi^ TraihcDV evdvs /cat ixaKapiovs rjSr] yeyovoTas 
/cat eVtScets" ovTas tovtcov ovhevos eTp€(f)ov KcoXvovaai 8e 

r COS" ovoLv LKavcog evSalfioatv /xt^tc auTOts" ivavTiovadai fjirjSeva 
ets" firjSev, iTracveZv t€ dvayKat^ovaaL rravTas to Xeyofxevou 
7) TTpaTTOfievov VTT^ avTOJVy edpeipav tolovtovs Tivas. 
KA. KaAT^v, cos eot/cas", Tpo<f)rjv et/OT^/cas". 

e A0. Fwat/cetW /xep' ow ^aacXlScov yvvaiKcJjv vecoGTi 
yeyovvLOjv ttXovglojv, /cat ep' dvSpwv ep-qpiia, Sta to /lat^ ^X^' 
Xdt,€Lv vrro TroXe/JLOJV /cat ttoXXcov KivSvvojVy tovs TratSas" 
rpe^ouCTcov. 

^ KA. "E;)(;et ya^ Aoyov. 

A0. *0 Se TTaTrjp ye auTOtS" au Troijxvia puev /cat irpo^aTa 
Kal dyeAas" dvSyoaiv tc /cat dAAa>^' ttoAAcov TroAAas" eKTaTO, 
505 avTous" Sc ots" TauTa TrapaScoaetv epueXXev rjyvoec ttjv iraTpcpav 
ov TTaiSevofJievovs tex^'^v, ovoav YiepoiKriv — TTOtjJLevcov ovtojv 
Yiepaihv, Tpaxelas x^P^^ eKyovojv — CKXrjpdv Kal LKavrjv ttoi- 
jxivas dire pydl,€ad at pudXa laxvpovs /cat hvvapiivovs dvpavXelv 

^ /cat dypviTveZv Kal el GTpaTeveodai Seot OTpaTeveoOai' 8te- 
<f)dap/jLevrjv Be Traiheiav vtto ttjs Xeyopbevrjs evSacfjiovLas ttjv 
MT^St/CT^v TTepielhev vtto yvvaiKcov Te Kal evvovx^^ TraiSev- 

5 devTas avTov tovs veXs, odev eyevovTO olovs rjv avTOVs ecKos 

108 



NOMfiN r 695 

yeveadai, rpo(f)fj dvcTTiTrXTJKrco rpa(f>€VTas. TrapaXa^ovreg 
8' ow ol TralSes TeXevTTjcravrog J^vpov rpv(f)rjs fiearol Kal 
aveTTnrXrj^ias , Trpcorov fxev rov erepov drepog direKreive raj 
L(Tcp dyavaKTCov y jjLerd 8e rovro avros pLaivopievog vno fieOrjs 5 
re Kal aTraihevGLas ttjv OLpx^jv dircaXeaev vtto Mt^Scop t€ kol 
rov Xeyofievov rore evvovxov, Kara<f)povrjGavros rrjs Ka/x,- 
/Sucrou iJLOjpias. 

KA. Aeyerat 817 ravrd ye, Kal eoLKev ax^^ov ovrco ttcos C 
yeyovevat. 

A0. Ka6 fjLTjv Kal ttoXlv els Tlipaas iXSeiv rrjv dpxrjv 
Sid Aapelov Kal rcov iirrd Xeyerai ttov. 

KA. Tt fi'qv; 5 

A0. Secopcofxev Srj (jvv€7t6}jl€voi rw Xoyco. Aapeto? yap 
^aaiXecos ovk rjv vos, Traiheia re ov SLarpvcjxixjr] redpapu- 
jjuevoSy eXdcjv S* els rrjv dpx^v Kal Xa^d)v avrrjv e^SojjLos, 
StelXero evrd pLepr] repuopievos, Sv Kal vvv en apuKpa ovei' 
para XeXeLTrrac, Kal vopLovs ^l^iov depievos olKelv laorrjra 10 
Koivqv riva el(j(f)epajv, Kal rov rod K^vpov Sao'pLov, ov d 
vnecrxero UepcraiSy els rov vopiov evehei, (fyiXiav TTopi^cov 
Kai Koivojviav TraGiv YlepGaiSi ^/OT^jU-acrt /cat ScopeaXs rov 
Ilepacov hrjpLov Trpoaayopievos' roiyapovv avrcp rd arparev- 
pLara puer' evvoias TTpoGeKri^oraro x^P^^ ouac eXdrrovs ojv 5 
KareXnre K.vpos. pierd Se Aapelov 6 rfj ^acnXiKfj Kal 
rpvcfxvor) irdXiv TrauSevdels TratSeta E,ep^r)s — " ^O. Aapeie," 
elirelv ianv ScKaiorarov lacoSy *' os ro Kvpov KaKOV ovk 
epLaOes, eSpeijja) Se "Eep^rjv ev rots avroXs rjOecriv ev oiGTrep e 
YLvpos K.apL^VGrjv " — d Se, are rcov avraJv TTaiSeicJov yevopLevos 
eKyovos, TrapaTrXijaLa direreXeaev roZs K.apL^vaov rradrjpLaaiv' 
Kal ox^Sov eK ye roaovrov ^aaiXevs ev Uepaats ovSets ttoj 
pLeyas eyyeyovev dXrjOws, ttXtjv ye ovopLan. ro 8* aurtov 5 
ov rvx^jS, d)s 6 epLOS Xoyos, dXX* 6 KaKos ^tos ov ol rdJv 
Siacfyepovrcos ttXovgLojv Kal rvpdvvcov rraZhes rd TToXXd ^ojglv' 696 
ov yap pLTj rrore yevrfrai Trats Kal dvrjp Kal yepojv eK ravrrjs 
rrjs rpo(f)rjs hia(j)epajv irpos dperrjv. a hrj, (jyapuev, rep vopio- 
derrj GKeTrreov, Kal rjpitv Se ev rep vvv Trapovrc. hiKaiov 
prjv, (L AaKeSaLpLovLoc, rovro ye rfj TrdAet vpLcov aTroStSdi^at, 5 
on irevia Kal rrXovrcp Kal ISicorela Kal ^aaiXela Sta^epoucrav 
ot5S rjvnvovv npLrjv Kal rpo(f)rjv vepuere, a? pLTj ro Kar* dpxds 
vpuv delov napd Beov Scepiavrevaaro nvos. ov ydp 87} Set b 

109 



696 b nAATi2N02 

Kara ttoXiv ye etvai ras rijxas vrrepexovcras, on tis ecrrtv 
ttXovtco Sta^epcuv, irr^l ovh ort ra^v^ 7) KaXog rj iG^vpos 
dv€V TLVos aperrjs, ovh^ dperrjg rjs dv (Ta)(f>poavvr] drrfj. 
5 ME. Ha)9 TOVTO, o) $€V€, Xiyetg; 

A0. 'AvSpeta 7TOV pLopiov dperrjg €v; 
ME. Ylcog yap ov ; 

A0. AiKaaop Toivvv 'avros rov Xoyov dKOvaas et crot 
Se^at dv avvoLKOv 7) yeCrova etvai nva G(f)68pa fjikv dvSpetov, 
10 ijirj crax^pova 8e dAA' dKoXaarov. 
C ME. Ev(l>rip,eL. 

A0. Tt §€; rex^iKov fxkv Kal Trepl ravra (jo(j>6vy aSt- 
Kov 84; 

ME. OuSajLto)?. 
5 A0. AAAa fjLTjv TO ye St/catov ou ^verai x^P^^ '^^^ 

aCO(f)pOV€LV. 

ME. nco? ya/D dv; 

A0. Ou8e /xT^v 6V ye uo(f)6v rjfjLetg vvvSr) TTpovOefJueda, rov 
Tas" T^Sovas" K"at AuTras" KeKTrj/jievov ov{x<f)Cjovovs rots opdols 
10 Aoyots" K^ctt eTTOfjievas . 
ME. Ou yap ow. 

A0. "Etc St) Kal rohe eTTiaKeijswjxeda rcov iv rats tto- 
ci Xeo-Lv ripLTjaecxiV eVe/<ra, Trolai re opOal Kal jjirj yiyvovrai 
e/cacTTore. 

ME. To TTolov; 

A0. ^oj(/) podVVT] dvev TTacrrj^ rrjg dXXrjs aperrjs €V 
5 ^vxfj Tivi fxefiovcofievT] TLpaov rj drt/jLov yiyvoir* dv Kara 
8lk7]v; 

ME. Ovk e^co OTTCOg €L7rC0. 

A0. Kat fjLTjv eiprjKag ye /xerptcos" elrrajv yap Srj c5v -j^/do- 
/XT^v OTTorepovovv, Tvapd fxiXos ejxoiy* dv hoKeZs (jiOiy^auOai. 
10 ME. KaAajs" TOLVvv yeyovos dv elrj, 

A0. Etei'* TO fxkv Srj Trpoadrj/JLa Sv Tifxai re Kal drt/xtat 
e ov Xoyov y dXXd tlvos puaXXov dXoyov ccyrj^, d^iov dv e'er]. 
ME. Hoj^poGVv-qv fioL (f)aLvr) Aeyetv. 

A0. Nat. TO Se ye twv dXXwv TrAeto-ra ij/xas" (h(f)eXovv 
jxeTa rrjs irpoadrjKrjs /xdAtcrr' dv Ttficofjievov opOoTara TifiaJro, 
5 /cat TO Seurepov hevTepcos' Kal ovtoj Stj Kara tov i^rjs Xoyov 
rds" i(f)€^rJ9 Tifxds Xay^dvov €Ka(JTOV 6p6a)s dv Xay)(dvoL, 
697 ME. "Exec TavTT]. 

110 



NOMfiN r 697 a 

A0. Tt ovv; ov vofioOerov /cat ravra av (j)iJGOfX€v etvat 
hiavifJieLV ; 

ME. Kat fxdXa, 

A0. BouAet St) Tct yikv aTravra /cat e^* eKaorrov epyov 5 
/cat /cara afjLLKpa €/C€tVoj ScD/i€V vet/xat, to Se '^pf'Xfj StcAetv, 
€7T€LSrj vofjiojv €afX€V /Cat avTOL 7TOJS eTnOvfJL'qrai, TretpaacD/xev, 
Stare/xetv x^P''^ '^^ '^^ fieyiara /cat 8euT€/oa /cat rpura; 

ME. riavu /X6V ow. 

A0. Aeyofxev roivvv on ttoXlv, (hs €olk€V, rrjv fJueXXovaav 10 
a(Lt,€Gdai T€ /cat euSat/xovi^aetv ets" SvvafjLLV dvdpcoTTLvrjv Set b 
/cat dvay/catov rt/xas" Te /cat dripiias hiavlfxeiv opOcjs. kariv 
Se 6pdcx)£ dpa TLjjLLcoTara pukv koI TTpcora rd Trepl rrjv ^vx^'^ 
dyadd /ceta^at, (ja)(f)poavv7]s virapxo'vcnr^s OLvrfjj hevrepa 8e 
TO. 7T€pl TO acofxa KoXd /cat dyaOd, /cat rplra ra Trept rrjv 5 
ovaiav /cat XPVP'^'^^ Xeyopueva' tovtcov Se av e/cros Tts" 
paivTj vopLoSerrjs rj ttoXis, els rtfids tj ;)^p7^/xaTa Trpodyovaa 
Tf ri Tiov varepajv els to irpoodev ripLols rdrrovaay ovd c 
oaiov Qvre ttoXltlkov dv Spcor] 7Tpdyp,a. eiprjadco ravra rj 

TTCOS T)pLLV; 

ME. Haw fxev ovv elprjadoj cabins. 

A0. Tavra piev roivvv rjpLas enl rrXeov eTTOLrjGev enreXv 5 
7) YiepGcbv TTepl SidGKei/jLS rrjs TToXirelas' dvevpiaKopLev Se 
U.ne.1 eincTv 4vl ;;^etpoi;s' avrovs yeyovoras, rrjv Se alriav 
(f)ap.eVy on ro eXevdepov Xiav dcfieXopievoi rod SijpLov, ro 
hearroriKov S* eirayayovres pidXXov rod TrpoGrjKOvros, ro 
(J)lXov diTCjXeaav /cat ro kolvov ev rfj TroAet. rovrov Se d 
^dapevros , ovd^ rj rd)v dpxovrcov ^ovXrj vrrep dpxopievojv Kat 
rod hrjpiov ^ovXever at, aAA* eVe/ca rrjs avrwv dpxrjs, dv n /cat 
crpLLKpov TrXeov eKdarore rjycovraL eaea^at a(f)Lcnv, dva^rarovs 
jjLev TToAets", dvao-rara Se eOvrj ^iXia irvpl Kara<f)deipavres , 5 
e-)(Opd)S re /cat dvrjXerjroJS pLtaovvres puGovvrai' drav re els 
Xpelav rod pudxeodat Trepl eavrcbv rovs Sijpiovs acfiCKvdjvrai, 
ovSev KOLVOV ev avrols av pLerd TrpodvpLias rod edeXeiv Kivhv- 
vevetv /cat pudxeGdat dvevpiGKovGiv ^ dXXd KeKrrjpievoi pivpiaSas e 
drrepdvrovs XoyLGpLW, dxprjGrovs els TToXepiov TrdGas KeKrrjv- 
^rat, /cat Kaddirep evSeets dvdpcoTTCov puGdovpievoLy vtto 
pLLGdojrdjv /cat odveicov dvdpd)7TOJV rjyodvral irore GwdrjGeGdaL. 
Trpos Se rovroLS dpiadaiveiv dvayKd^ovrat, Xeyovres epyois 698 
OTt Xrjpos Trpos X/^vcrdi/ re Kat dpyvpov eGnv eKaGrore rd 

111 



698 a HAATfiNOS 

Xeyofxeva TifMia /cat KaXa /caret ttoXlv. 

ME. IldvV fJL€V ovv. 

5 A0. To, fxev Srj Tvepi ye YlepGOiv, (hs ovk opdcos ra vvv 
SiOLKecraL 8ta rrjv a^oSpa SovXeuav re /cat SeaTToreiav, reXos 

ME. Haw /xev ow. 

A0. Ta 8e Tre/ot [ttjv] rrjs ^ArrLKrjs av TToAtreta? to jxera 

10 TOVTO wcravTOJs rjfjLds Sce^eXdeXv ■)(peajv, ojs rj TTavreXrjg /cat 

b OLTTO TTaawv dpxcov eXevdepia rrjs pierpov ixovarjs d-px^s v<j>* 
irepojv ov upuKpcp ;^et/3a>^'' rjpiZv yap /car' eKeivov rov xpdvov, 
ore 7] Yiepaojv iTTidecng rols "KXXrjaiv, taoj? 8e cr;^eSoi^ diTacjiv 
Tols TTjv Kvpa)7rr]v oIkovcflv, iyiyvero, iroXireia re tjv TraXaid 
5 /cat €K rLfJLrjpidrcov dp-)(ai rives rerrdpcov, /cat SeaTrorts ivrjv 
TLS al8a)9, 8t' 7]v SovXevovres rots rore vopiois ^rjv rjOeXopuev. 
/cat TTpos rovTois Srj to piiyeOos rod gtoXov /cara re yrjv /cat 
/caret OdXarrav yevofxevov, cf)6^ov diropov ipu^aXoVy SovXeiav 

C ert /xet^opa eTTolrjaev rjfjids tols re dpxovacv /cat rot? vopLois 
SovXevaai, /cat Sta Trdvra Tavd* rjfjLLV Gweireae irpos rjfjLas 
avTOVs G(j)6hpa ^tAta. gx^^ov yap 8e/ca kreo-cv Trpd ttjs iv 
SaAa/xtvt vavp.axi'CtS dcfyiKero Actrts" Ile/ocrt/cov gtoXov dycov, 

5 7T€jJiipavTOS Aapeuov SiappijSrjv eiri re ^AdrjvaLOVs /cat 'Epe- 
Tpids, i^avSpaTToSiddiJievov dyayelv, ddvaTOV aura) Trpoenrchv 
pLTj TTpd^avTi TavTa. /cat o Aarts" rous" /xei' ^^peTpids eV rtvt 

d ^pa^el XP^^V rravTdTTaGiv /caret KpdTOs re etAei' pLvpidcn 
Gvx^cLiS, /cat rtva Aoyoi' ets rT^v rj/JieTepav ttoXlv d<f)rJK€V 
<j)o^€p6v, (hs ovhels ^^peTptdjv avTOV d7ro7T€<f)€vyd)S eirj' 
avvd^avT€s yap dpa ras" x^^P^^ aayr^vevaacev Trdaav ttjv 

5 ^^peTpiKTjv OL crrpartcurat tov Aart8os". o §9) Aoyo?, etr' 
dXrjdrjs €LT€ /cat 07797 d(f)LK€TO, rovs re d'AAous" "EAAT^vas' /cat 
817 /cat ^AOrjvaLOVs i^eTrXrjTTev, /cat TTpea^evofievoLs avToXs 

e 77avra;)(oo'e ^orjdelv ovSeis rjdeXev ttXtjv ye AaKeSaipLOVLCov 
ovTOL 3e U770 re tov irpos M.eGaiijvrjv ovtos t6t€ TToXepuov /cat 
et Srj TL hi€KOjXv€V dAAo avTo-us — ov yap lafxev Xeyofxevov — 
vcjTepoi S' ovv d(f)LKOVTO Trjs ev MapaOwvi fidx^js yevojjbevrjs 

5 ^ta rjfjbepa. pi€Td Se tovto TrapacjKevai re pbeydXat Aeyd- 

fxevat /cat (XTretAat i(f)OLTWv jxvpiai irapd ^aaiXecos. irpo'CovTOs 

8e ro{» xP^^^'^y AoLp^Xos [xev TeBvdvai iXex^y], veog Se /cat 

acf)oSp6s 6 vos avTOV 7Tap€tXr](f)€vai, Trjv dpxrjv /cat ovSapuajs 

699 d(f)LGTaadaL Trjs op/jirjs. ol 8e ^ AOrjvaXoL irdv tovto a)ovTO iirl 

112 



NOMfiN r 699 a 

acfyds avrovs TrapaaKevd^eadai Sta ro M.apa6a>VL yevofx^vov, 
Koi oLKOVovre^ "Adcov re hLopvTTOfxevov koL 'EAAt^ctttoi/tov 
t,evyvvix€vov kol to tcov vecjv ttXtjOos, rjyTJcravro ovre /caret 
yrjv GcjiLGLV elvai crojrrjpiav ovre Kara ddXarrav ovre yap 5 
^orjBrjCjeLV avroZs ovSeva — puefjivrj/JLevoL cos" ovS' ore to rrpo- 
Tepov rjXdov /cat tol ire pi 'E/oer/otav SceTrpd^avTO, a(j>iGi ye 
ouSetS" t6t€ i^oTJOrjaev ovS^ eKLvhvvevGev dvpLfxaxofxevos' rau- 
Tov 8r) TTpoGeSoKOJv /cat t6t€ yevrjGeadai to ye /cara yrjv — /cat b 
Kara ddXaTTav 8 ad TraGav aTTOpiav iwpcov GcoTrjpLa^, vechv 
Xi^Xiiov /cat ert TrXeovcov errKfyepofJiivcov , pulav Srj GOJTTjpiav 
GVV€v6ovv, XeTTTTjv fjL€v /Cat CLTTopov, pbovTjv S' ovv, ^XiifjavTes 
irpos TO TTpoTepov yevopievov , cos i^ drropcjov /cat totc e<j>aiveTO 5 
yeveGdai to viKrJGai pLa^opLevovs' ^ttI Se TTJg eXirihos 6)(0V' 
pL€VOL TavTTjs TjvpLGKOv KaTa(f)vy7]i> avTols els aVTOVS pLovovs 
elvai /cat tovs deovs, raur' ovv avTols irdvTa (fyiXiav dXXriXcjJV C 

iv€7rOC€L, 6 <f)6^0S 6 t6t€ TTapOJV 6 T€ €/C TCijV VOpiCOV TCOV 

epLTTpoGdev yeyovcos, ov SovXevovTes tols rrpoGdev vopiots 

eKeKTTJVTO, 7]V alScO TToAAa/Ct? iv rot? dvCO XoyOLS €L7TOpL€V, 

fj /cat SovXeveiV €<f)api€v SeXv tovs pueXXovTas dyadovs ecrecr^at, 5 
rjs 6 SetAos" iXevdepos /cat d(f)o^os' ov et t6t€ pLj) Seo? eXa^ev, 
ovK dv 7TOT€ GVveXdcov TjpivvaTO, oi)S* 7JpLVV€v lepoZs T€ /cat 
Td(f)OLS /cat TrarptSt /cat rots" dXXots ot/cetots" re ajLta /cat ^tAot?, 
a)G7T€p TOT^ €^orjdr]Gev y dXXd Kara GpuKpa dv iv tw totc d 
TjpLcov eKaGTOS GKeSaGdels dXXos dXXoGe SveGTrdpr]. 

ME, Kat /xaAa, co ^eVe, opdcos re e'iprjKas /cat aavTco re 

/cat T^ TTaTpihl TTpeTTOVTCOS. 

A0. "Eo-rt TavTa, cL MeytAAe* Trpos" ya/a g€ Ta iv TCp 5 
t6t€ xpov^i^ yevd/xeva, kolvcovov tjj tcov TraTepcov yeyovoTa 
(f)VG€i, SiKaiov Xiyeiv. iinGKOTTeL purjv /cat cru /cat KAetvtas' 
e t Tt TTpos TTjv vopLodeGuav TTpoGT^KOVTa Xiyopuev ' ov yap puvdcov 
eVe/ca Sie^epxopiaLy ov Xiyco 8' eVe/ca. opdre ydp' cTretSi^ C 
Ttva TpoTTOV TavTov TjpiLV GvpL^e^T^Ket TrdOos OTTep YlipGats, 
c/cctVot? piev iirl TraGav SovXetav dyovGcv tov Srjpuov, rip.iv 8' 
av rovvavriov iirl TraGav iXevdepuav TTporpeTrovGt rd ttAt^^t^, 
TTCos 817 /cat Tt XiycopLev rovvrevdeVj ol rrpoyeyovores rjpilv 5 
epuTTpoGdev XoyoL rpoTrov rivd KaXcos cIglv elprjpbivoi, 

ME. Aeyets" eu* TT€ipdj 8 ert Ga<j)iGr€pov rjpbtv GrjpiTJvaL 7^0 
TO vw Xeyopuevov . 

A0. "EcTTat ravra. ovk -^v, w ^LXol, -qpiZv eVt TctJi^ 

VOL. I 113 I 



700 a HAATfiNOS 

TraAatcDi^ vofjLCxJV 6 SrjfjLos tlvojv KvpLO£, aAAa rpoirov riva 
5 €Kwv iSovXeve rot? vofxoL^. 
ME. riotots' St) Xeyets; 

A0. TotS" 7T€pl rrjV fJLOVCTLKrjV TTpCOTOV TTjV TOTe, tVtt i^ 

OLpXV^ ^^^Xdcofiev rrjv rod iXevdepov Xiav iTTiSoaiv fiiov. 
^L-Qprnxevr] yap Srj rore tjv r]jJiZv rj JjUovglkt} Kara eiSr] re 

b iavrrjs drra Kal CT;\;7y/xara, /cat rt Tyi/ ctSos (LSrjs €z5;)(;at Trpog 
6eov£, ovopia §6 vpivoL irreKaXovvTO' /cat rovrco Srj ro ivavriov 
TjV cLSrjs erepov elSog — Oprjvovs Se rt? av avrovs /xaAtcrra 
CKaXecrev — /cat Traiojves erepov, /cat aAAo, Alovvgov yeVecrts' 

5 ot/xat, hiSvpapi^os Aeyo/xevo?. vopiovs re avio rovro rovvopia 
iKoXovv, (pSrjv COS" rtva iripav irreXeyov Se KtOapcoSiKOvg. 
TOVTOJV Srj Siar€TaypL€vajv /cat dXXcov tlvcov, ovk i^rjv dXXcp 

C els dXXo KaraxpTJoOai pueXovs etSo?* to Se Kvpos tovtcjv, 
yvojvai re /cat d'/xa ywvra St/caaat, ^rjpnovv re ad rov pur) 
TTeidopLevov, ov avpiy^ tjv ovhe rives dpLovaoL ^oal rrXijdovs, 
KadaTTep rd vvv, ovS* av Kporoi eTraivovs aTTohihovres » dXXd 

5 rots' pi€V yeyovocjL Trepl TraiSevacv SeSoypLevov aKovetv tjv 
avroXs pier a aiyrjs Std reXovs, Tratal Se /cat TratSayo^yots' /cat 
ro) TrXetara) oxXco pd^Sov Koapiovcrqs rj vovderrjcns eytyvero. 

d ravr ovv ovrco reraypcevcos jjOeXev dp^eaOai rojv rroXirdjv ro 
TrXrjdos, /cat pur] roXpidv Kpiveiv 8td dopv^ov puerd Be ravra, 
TTpo'Covros rov xpovov, dpxovres p^ev rrjs dpuovaov TrapavopLtas 
TTOirjrai eyiyvovro (f)V(jeL puev TrotT^rt/cot, dyvcopioves Be Trepl 

5 ro SiKaiov rrjs M.ovGrjs /cat ro vopLipioVy ^aK^evovres /cat 
pidXXov rov Beovros /care;)^o/xevot vcji* rjBovrjs, Kepavvvvres Be 
dprjvovs re vpivois /cat Traicovas BidvpapL^oiSy /cat avXojBlas 
Brj rats KidapcpBiais papLovpLevot, /cat rrdvra els navra avv- 

e ayovres, piovaiKrjs dKovres vtt* dvoias KaraifjevBopuevoi cLs 
opdorrjra piev ovk e;\;ot ovB^ rjvnvovv pLOVcrLKTj, rjBovfj Be rfj 
rov X'^^povros, etre ^eXricov etre x^^P^^ dv etrj ns, Kpivoiro 
opBorara. rotavra Brj Tvoiovvres TvoirjpLara, Xoyovs re einXe- 

5 yovres roiovrovs , rols ttoXXols eveOeaav TrapavopLiav els rrjV 
pLOVGLKTjv Kal roXpiav d)S iKavoZs ovarcv Kpiveiv odev Br) ra 
701 dearpa e^ dcfxjovojv (fxjovTjevr* eyevovro, ws erratovra ev 
pLovaais ro re KaXov Kal pLifjy Kal dvrl dpiaroKparias iv avrfj 
dearpoKparla ns Trovrjpd yeyovev. el ydp Brj Kal BrjpLOKparia 
ev avrfj ns piovov eyevero eXevdepcov dvBpcov, ovBev av rravv 

5 ye Beivov rjv ro yeyovos' vvv Be rjp^e p,ev rjputv e/c puovGiKrjs 

114 



NOM^N r 701 a 

7] TrdvTOJV €1? TTOLvra ao(j)ta£ So^a /cat Trapavofita, (n)V€(f)i' 
G7T€TO §€ iXevdepia. dcjyo^oL yap eytyvovro cos etSores", r) 
Se aSeta dvaicr)(vvTiav ivereKev to yap rr^v rod ^eXriovos 
So^av fjLT) (f)o^€L(TdaL Sid OpdaoSi rovr* avro ianv crx^Sov b 
7) TTOvrjpd dvaccTXVvTLa, Sid Bij twos iXevdepuas Xiav diro- 
T€ToXp.r]iJL€vr]s . 

ME. ^AXrjdecTTaTa Xeyets. 

A0 . *lEi(f)€^'fjs Srj TavTji TTJ iXevOepta rj tov fjir] iOiXeiv to is 5 
dpxovGL SovXeveiv yiyvoiT* dvy Kal inofjievT] TavTT) (jyevyeiv 
TTaTpos Kal fjLTjTpos Kal TTpeapVTepwv SovXclav Kal vovOeTrjcriv, 
/cat iyyvs tov TeXovs ovuiv vojjlcdv ^rjTeXv fjLT] VTrrjKoocs etvat, 
TTpos avro) Se rjSr] tw TeXei opKOjv Kal TTiGTecov Kal to irapdnav C 
deojv fJLTj <j)povTit,€LVy T7JV XeyofievT^v iraXaidv TiTavLKr]v (f)VGLV 
iTTiSecKvvaL Kal fjLLfjLovfjLevoLS, €7tI Td aura rrdXiv eKeiva d(f>tKO' 
piivovSi x^^^'^^^ alwva hidyovTas pLrj Xrj^ai ttot€ KaKCJv. tlvos 
St7 Kol rav^' rjfiLV av X^ptv iXexO'rj; SeXv ^atVerat epuoiye 5 
olovTTep L7T7TOV TOV Xoyov €KdaTOT€ dvaXafju^dveLV, Kal fir) 
Kaddnep dxdXivov KeKTTjfjievov to GTopua, j8ta vtto tov Xoyov 
(f)€poiJL^vov, /caro, ttjv TrapoLfiLav aTTo twos ovov Trecrelu, dAA' d 
inavepajTav to PvvStj Xex^ev, to tlvos Srj ;^a/)tv [eVe/ca] raura 
iXexOr); 

ME. KaAcDs-. 

A0. Taura tolvvv etprjTaL eKetvcov eVe/ca. 5 

ME. Tlvojv; 

A0. 'EAefa/xev cLs tov vofjLoOeTrjv Set Tpiwv aTOXd^dixevov 
vofJLoOcTelv, 6tt(jjs rj vofioOcTOVfjievr] ttoXls iXevdepa re eoTai 
/cat ^t'Ary iavTTJ Kal vovv efet. TavT tjv rj ydp; 

ME. Yldvv fji€v ovv. 10 

A0. TovTOJv eVe/ca Srj TToXiTeias Tr\v T€ SeaTTOTLKCOTdTrjv C 
TTpoeXofievoL Kal ttjv iXevdepLKatTaTrjv, emoKOTTOvpiev vvvl 
TTOTepa TOVTOJV opdcjs TToAtreverat • Xa^ovTes Se avTCov €/ca- 
T€pas pLeTpioTrjTa rtva, tcov p.€V tov SeaTro^etv, tcjv Se tov 
eXevdepLaaai, KaTelSofiev otl t6t€ BLa(f)€p6vTOJS iv aurats 5 
€y€V€TO euTTpayta, iirl Se to aKpov dyayovTCov iKaTepojv, 
TCOV pi6v SovXelas, tcov Se TovvavTuov , ov cruvqveyKev ovt€ 

Tots OVT€ TOLS. 

ME. 'AAi^^eWara Xeyeis. 7^2 

A0 . Kat purjv avTcov y €V€Ka Kal to AcopLKOv iOeaadpLeda 
KaTOLKi^6p,€vov GTpaTOTTeSov Kal Tds TOV AapSdvov VTrcopetas 

115 



a nAAT12N02 N0M12N T 

re Kat, ttjv ein daXdrrr] KaroiKiGLV , koI rovg Trpcvrovg Stj rovg 

5 7T€pi\nT€is yevofxevovs rrjs <f)dopds, €tl Se rovs efXTTpoadev 
TOVTCJJV yevojjievovs rjfjLLV X6yov£ Trept re jjLovcnKrj? /cat fxediqs 
Koi ra TOVTOJV kn rr pore pa. ravra yap rrdvra e'iprjraL rod 
KanSeXv eveKa ttcos ttot av ttoXls dpiara olkoltj, Kal ISta 

b 7Taj£ av Tt? ^eXnara rov avrov ^lov Stayayot- el Se Srj n 
TTeTTOirjKaixev rrpovpyov, ris iror^ av eXey^os yCyvouro rjfXLV 
TTpo^ 'qixds avrovs Xex^^^Sy oj MeytAAe re /cat KAetvta; 
KA. 'EydS Ttva, c5 ^evey /xot 8o/cco KaravoeXv. eoiKev Kara 

5 rvxy]v nvd r^fjuZv rd rdv Xoymv rovrcov rravrcov Sv Sie^i^Xdofxev 
yeyovevat' axeSov yap els ;^/3etav avrcov eyojy* eXrjXvda rd 
vvVy /cat /caret rtva av Kaipov av re Trapayeyovas dpua /cat 

C MeytAAos" ohe. ov ydp 0.770 /c/ou0o/xat G<f>ci) rd vvv epiol 
avfjL^aXvov, dXXd /cat Trpos olcovov rcva Trotou/xat. 'q ydp 
TrXeLGrrj rrjs Vipi^rrjg eTTLX^tpel rcva diroiKiav TTOi-qaaaOaij 
/cat TTpoardrreL roZs KvcucJtots' eTnpLeXrjdrjvac rov TTpdyfxaros, 

^ Tj he rcbv Kvajmcov ttoXls epLOi re /cat aAAot? evvea' a/xa he 
/cat vofjLOVS rcjv re avroOc, et rives rjfjids dpeaKovatVy rtdeaOat 
KeXeveCy /cat et nves erepcoOev, /Jirjhev VTroXoyLt^opievovs rd 
^evLKOv avrcJoVy av jSeArtous" (fyalvcovrai, . vvv ovv efxoi re Kai 

d vpXv ravrrjv hwpiev xdpiv e/c rcbv elprjij,eva>v e/cAe^avres", rep 
Xoyo) (jvarrjaajfieda rroXiv, olov e^ dpx'^S KaroiKi^ovres, 
/cat a/xa jmev rjfjLLV ov ^rjrovp^ev eTTLGKeifjis yevqaeraiy a/xa 
8e eyo) rdx^ dv ;(/)7yCTat/x7yv eh rrjv pueXXovaav ttoXlv ravrj) 

5 rfj avardaet,. 

A0. Ov TToXepiov ye eTrayyeXXeiSy cS KAeti^ta* dAA et /X17 
rt MeytAAoj irpoaavres, rd Trap ejxov ye rjyov gol iravra Kara 
vovv vnapxeiv et? hvvap,iv. 
KA. Eu Aeyets". 

10 ME. Kat purjv Kal rd rrap* e/xou. 

e KA. KaAAtcrr' elp-qKarov. drdp TreipcLpieda Xoyco TTpaJrov 
KaroLKL^ecv rrjv ttoXlv. 



116 



BOOK IV 

SHORT ANALYSIS 

704-707^* — Foreign trade and a navy are dangers to the 
honesty and the bravery of a people. Therefore our colony should 
not be too near the sea, and its soil should produce various but 
not over-abundant crops. 

707 e-708 e. — Better face the diflBiculty of welding into one 
a heterogeneous mass of colonists than that of overcoming the 
general prejudice against any improvement in polity or legislation 
which you will encounter if they all come from one city. 

708 e-709 e. — Though bad luck may thwart the highest skill, 
without skill the best of luck cannot be utilized. 

7096-7125. — The best chance for the establishment of a 
perfect polity is that a " divine " lawgiver should enjoy the com- 
plete confidence of a revered and public-spirited despot. 

7126-716. — The only true polity is one in which Law is 
supreme, and in which laws are made in the interest of the whole 
community. 

716-718 b. — Our whole duty towards God and all superior 
powers and existences is here set forth. 

718 b to end of book. — The need of rational, persuasive, and 
artistic prefaces to the laws. 



A0. Oepe StJ, TLva 8et SLavorjOrjvai 7tot€ ttjv ttoXlp jqa 
kaeadai; Xeyat 8e ovri rouVo/xa avrrjs ipcorojv otl ttot' eart 
ra vvv, ovhk els rov eVetra )(poPov otl Senjaec KoXelv avrrjv — 
TOVTO fjL€v yap Tax ^^ ioujs /cat o KaTOLKiafios avTJJs rj rts" 

TOTTOS, rj TTOTajJLOV TLVOS 7] KprjVr^S ^ deCJV eTTWVVfJLLa TCJV iv TO) c 

TOTTO) TTpoadeLT] tt)i' avTOJV <j>ripiriv KaLvfj yevofjuevrj Trj ttoX^l — \y 
ToSe Se 7T€pl avTTJs ioTcv o ^ovXofjLevos fiaXXov inepcoTco, 
TTOTepov CTTt^aAaTTtStos" ecrrat tls rj p^epaata. 

117 



04 b HAATliNOS 

KA. S;)^e8ov, cS $€V€, OLTTex^L daXdrrrjg ye rj 7t6Xl9, t^s" irepi, 
5 ra vvvSt] XexO^vra r^jxlv, els rivas oySoT^Acovra Grahiovs. 
A0. Tt Se; At/xeWs" a/o' etcrtv /cara ravra avrrjsy t] to 
TTapdnav dXifxevos; 

KA. YivXifxevos fJL€V ovv ravrrj ye cos Bvvarov iartv 
fidXtara, cS ^eve, 
C A0. HaTrat, otov Aeyets". rt Se 7r€/9t avrrjv rj ^copa; 
TTorepa 7Tdpi(j>opos '^ Kai tlvcov imheris; 
KA. Sp^eSov ovhevos ivcSe'qS' 

A0. rctro)!/ Se avT^S" TrdAt? ap' earat rt? ttXtjctlov; 
5 KA. Oi) irdvVy hCo Koi KaroiKL^eraf TraXaid ydp res i^- 
OLKYjais iv TO) TOTTCp yevopiivrj ttjv •)(^u)pav ravrrjv epTjfxov 
aTTeLpyaarai XP^^^^ dpLrix<^vov oaov. 

A0. Tt Se TreSicov re Kal opcjv /cat vXrjs; ttcos fiepos 
CKdarajv rjfJLiv eiXrjx^Vj 
lo KA. n/30creotAC€ rfj rijs dXXrjs KpT^rrys" (f>vaei oXtj. 
d A0. Tpa^vrepav avrrjv rj TreSieLvorepav dv Xeyois. 
KA. Yidvv fxkv ovv, 

A0. Ov Toivvv dviaros ye dv elrj rrpos dperrjs kttjglv. 

€t jLtei' ydp €7n6aXarTLa re kfieXXev elvai /cat evXtpLevos Kal 

5 fxr) rrdpicfiopos dXX imSerjs 7TO?(Xa)v, fJueydXov rcvos €8et 

aojrrjpos re avrfj /cat vojJLodercov deiojv tlvcov, et /x?) TroAAa 

re e/xeAAev i^'^Ty /cat TTOiKiXa /cat <j)avXa e^etv TOLavrrj (jujoei 

yevopievrj' vvv he TrapapLvdcov e^^L to tcjv oyBoi^KovTa crra- 

Slcov. eyyvTepov /xeVrot rou Seoi^ros" /cetrat tt^s" OaXdTTrjs , 

705 O'X^^^^ ocrov €vXifX€va)T€pav avTrjV (f>f]s elvai, Ofxcos 8e dya- 

TTrjTov /cat TOVTO. TrpoaocKos ydp ddXaTTa X^P^- '^^ H'^^ 

Trap* cKdaTrjv rjfxepav rjSv, fxdXa ye purjv ovtojs dXfxvpov /cat 

TTiKpov yeiTovrjfjia' efiTToplas ydp /cat ;)^/)7^/>taTtcr/xou 8ta Kairr]- 

5 Aetas" epLTTLpLTrXdaa auri^v, -^^Ty TraAt/x^oAa /cat aTrtcrra rats' 

1JJVXOA.S evTiKTOvaa, avTr\v re tt/oos" avTrjv Trjv rroXiv dmaTOV 

/cat d(f)LXov TTOiel /cat tt/oos" tous" olAAous' dvOpconovs cbaavTCos. 

rrapapLvdiov he hrj rrpos ravra /cat ro 7Tdjji(f)opos etvac KeKTrjTai, 

b Tpax^la he ovua hrjXov ojs ovk dv 7roXv(f)op6s [re etT7 /cat 

7TdpL(f)opos] dfia- TOVTO ydp exovaa, TToXXrjv e^aycoyrjv dv 

TTapexofxevrj, vofilafJuaTOS apyvpov /cat xP^^^v ttoXiv dvTepL- 

TripLTrXaiT dv, ov pueZ^ov /ca/cov cos erros elirelv TToXei dvd^ 

5 evos ev ovhev dv yiyvoiTO et? yewaicov /cat hiKaicov rjdcov 

KTrjcFLVf d)s e^a/xet' et fjbepLvijpieda, ev toZs rrpoadev Adyots". 

118 



N0M12N A 705 b 

KA. *AAAa fxefiVT^fxeOa, /cat avyxo^povfjuev t6t€ Xeyeiv 
rnxds 6pda)s koL to, vvv, 

A0. Tt he Srj; vav7rr)yr]crLiJL7]9 vXrjs 6 roTTog rjfjLlv rrjs c 
X<J^poLS TTojs €X€l; 

KA. OvK eartv ovre rt? iXaTq Xoyov d^la ovr av TrevKT), 
KVirdpLTTos T€ ov TToXXrj' ttLtvv r av /cat TrXdravov oXiyqv 
av evpoi Tcs, ols Br) TTpos rd rcov ivros tojv ttXoLcov [xeprj ^ 
dvayKalov rots vavTrr^yoXs XPV^^^^ eKdarore. 

A0. Kat ravra ovk dv KaKcbs exoi rfj x^P^ '^^ (f>VG€ajs. 

KA. Tt' Sj; 

A0. Mt/XTjcretS" TTOvqpds /xt/xetcr^at tovs TToXefJULOvs ^r) 
paSlcus SvvaaOal riva ttoXlv dyadov. (J 

^KA. EtV Bri TL Tcjv €lpr]jjL€va)v ^Xeijjas elires o Xeyeis; 

A0. *n 8atjJi6yL€, ^vXarri fie els to /car' dpxds elprj- 
fxevov dTTOpXeTrojv, to irepl twv KprjTLKWv vofxcov co? Trpos 
ev TL pXeiToieVj /cat 817 /cat tovt iXeyeTrjv avTO elvai a(/)(jj ^ 
TO TTpos Tov TToXe/JLoVy iycb Se VTToXa^ojv eliTov cos otl fjuev 
els dpeTTjv Trot ^XeTTOt ra rotaura vofic/jia /cet/xei/a, /caAcD? 
exot, TO Be OTL irpos fiepos dXX* ov TTpos irdaav axeBov, ov 
Trdvu (Tvvexf^povv vvv ovv vjxeZs (jlol ttjs Trapovorrjs vofio- q 
deoias dvTL(f)vXd^aTe eTTOjjievoL, idv dpa tl fjur) irpos dpeT'^v 
TeXvov 7) TTpos dpeTTJs fiopLov vofiodeTCo. TOVTOV yap Br) 
TiSeadaL tov vofxov opdcos VTTOTLdepLaL fiovov, 6s av BiKr)v 
TO^OTOV eKduTOTe aTOxdtj)TaL tovtov otco dv uvvexiJ^S tovtojv 706 
del KaXov tl crvveTTr)TaL p,6va), ra Be dXXa av/JLTravTa rrapa- 
XeLTrr)y idv re tls ttXovtos edv re apa tl tcjv dXXcov twv 
TOLOVTOJV ov Tvyxdvr) dvev tCjv TTpoeipr)[Levoiv . ttjv Be Br) 
fjLLfir)GLV eXeyov ttjv tcjv TroXefJulcov ttjv KaKr)v TOLdvBe yi- ^ 
yveodaL, OTav oIkjj fxev tls TTpos daXdTTj), XvTTrJTaL S' vtto 
TToXefJLLCJV, OLOV — ^pdocj yap ovtl ixvr)(jLKaKeZv ^ovXojJLevos 

Vp.LV MtVcDS" yap Br) TTOTe tovs OLKOVVTaS Tr)V ^ATTLKr)V 

TTapecmjoaTO els ;)^aAe7rrJv rti^a (popdv BaapLOV, BvvapuLV 5 
TToXXr)v /cara ddXaTTav KeKTr)p,evos, ol S' ovTe ttcj rrXoZa 
€KeKTr)VTOy Kaddrrep vvv, TroAe/xt/ca, ovt* av Tr)V X'^P^^ TrXt^pr) 
vavTTr)yr)<jLpLCJV ^uAcov cjgt* evfiapcos vavTLKr)v 7rapa(7;)^ec7^at 
BvvapLLv ovKovv oloL T iyevovTO Std fjLLfjLijaeojs vavTLKrjs 5 
auTOt vavTaL yevofievoL evdvs t6t€ tovs TToXep^iovs dfiv- 
vaadaL, €tl yap dv TTXeovdKLS eTTTa aTToAecrat TratSas" avTOLS 

<TVVT)VeyK€V, TTplv dvTL TTe^CJV OTtXlTUJV p.OVLfJiOJV VaVTLKOVS c 

119 



)6c nAATi2N02 

y€vofX€VOVs iOtaOrjvai, ttvkvcl aTTOTTr^Scovras , SpojjLLKwg els ras 
vavs raxv ttolXlv aTTOj^ojpeiVy kol Sok€lv jjirjSev alaxpov TTOieZv 

jJLT) ToXfJLOJVTaS a7To6vr]OK€LV [JL€VOVraS €7n<f)€pOfX€VOJV TToXe- 

5 fjLLCJV, dAA' eiKvias avrots yiyveodai TTpoc/xxGeig Kal a(f)6Spa 
irotfjLas oirXa re aTToXXvaiV Kal (J)evyovGL St] nvas ovk 
aiGXpo^S, o)s <j>aoLVy (f^vydg. ravra yap e/c vavnKrjs ottXl- 
recas pij/jLara (fnXei avpL^aiveiv, ovk a^ta erraivojv TToXXaKca- 
d fJivpiajv, dXXd TOVvavTiov edit] yap rrovr^pd ovSerrore edit,eiv 
Set, Kal ravra ro rcov TToXircjv ^eXnarov puepos. rjv Se rrov 
rovro ye Kal irap *Op.T]pov Xa^elv, on ro eTnrrjhevpia rjv 
ro roLovrov ov KaXov. 'OSvaaevg yap avrcp XouSopeX rov 

5 ^Ayapuepuvova, rojv 'A;^at6tjv rore vtto rcov Tpwojv Karexo- 
pueviov rfj p^dxj], KeXevovra ras vavs els rrjv OdXarrav 
KaOeXKeiVy 6 8e p^aAcTratVet re avra> Kal Xeyei — 

e OS KeXeai iroXepLoio avveoraoros Kai dvrrjs 

viqas evGeApiovs aAao eAKeiVy o<pp en puaAAov 
Tpojo-l pikv evKrd yevrjrai eeXSopLevoial rrep epLTTrfSy 
TjpiLV 8' aliTVS oXedpos eTnppeTrrj- ov yap ^Axatol 
c GX'^o'ovGLV TToXepLOV vrjcbv d'AaS' eXKopuevdcoVy 

dAA' dTTOTTarrraveovaiv y epcDrjGOVGL he xdppirjs' 
707 ev9a Ke gt] ^ovXrj SrjXiJGeraLy oV dyopevets. 

ravr ovv eyiyvoJGKe /cat e/cetvos", on KaKov ev OaXdrrrj 
rpLt^peis oTrXiraLS TrapeGrajGac puaxopLevoLS' Kal Xeovres dv 
eXd(f)ovs eOiGdelev (j)evyeLV roLovroLS edeGi ;)^/06L)/>tevot. Trpos 

5 Se rovrois at hid rd vavnKa TToXeojv hwdpLeis dpia Gcorr^plaq 
Tt/xds" ov rep KaXXiGrcp rchv TToXepuKcbv dTTohihoaGiv' hud 
KVpepviqnKrjs ydp Kal 7Tevrr]KovrapxloLS Kal ipenKrjSy Kal 

b TTavrohaTTCov Kal ov Tvdvv Girovhacwv dvdpajircjv yiyvop,evr]s, 
rds npids eKdGrois ovk dv hvvairo 6p6cos diTohLhovai, rts". 
KairoL TTcbs dv en TToXireia yiyvoiro opdrj rovrov Grepopuevr] ; 
KA. I];\;eS6v dhvvarov. dXXd ftT^v, cS feVe, rrjv ye irepl 

5 YiaXapilva vavpiaxlcLV rcov ^YjXXtjvcjv TTpos rovs ^ap^dpovs 
yevopievTjv 'q pie is ye 01 K.prjres rrjV *EAAdSa ^apuev crcucrat. 
A0. Kat ydp ol TToXXol rcov ^KXXtJvcov re Kal ^ap^dpwv 

C XeyovGi ravra. rjpLeis 8e, co ^tAe, eyco re Kal She, Me- 
ytAAos", <f)apLev rrjv ne^rjv pidx^jv rrjv ev MapaOwvi yevopLevr]v 
Kal ev nAaratats", rr]v pikv dp^ai rrjs Gcorrjplas rols ''EAAr^at, 

120 



NOMflN A 707 c 

rr]v Se reXos iTTideZvai, kol tcls fxev ^eXriovg rovs "^XXr]vas 
TTOLTJcraL, ras" Se ov ^eXrlovs, Iv* ovtojs XeycDfxev irepl rcop 3 
Tore (jruGGCoaaacov rj^ds jjuaxcov Trpos yap rfj irepl HaXafilua 
TTjv TTepl TO * Apre/JiLGLov aoL TTpoadTJaoj Kara OdXarrav /xa;^7^v. 
aAAa yap aTTO^Xeirovres vvv irpos TToXireias dperrjv Kal d 
■)(^ci)pas <j)V(jLV GKOTTOv/jieOa /cat vofxcjjv rd^Lv, ov to croS^ecr^at , 
re Kal elvai fxovov dvdpajTTOis rL/JLLCoTarov rjyovfxevoLy KaOa/nep 
ol TToXXoL, TO 8 d)s ^eXTLGTOVs yiyveod ai t€ Kal elvai 
ToaovTOv \p6vov OGOV dv (JjGLV e'iprjTai 8' rjixlv ot/xat kol 5 
TOVTO iv Tois TTpoodev. 
KA. Tt ^trjv; 

A0. ToUTO ToivVV GKOTTWjJieda pLOVOVy €i KaTa TTjV aVTTjV 

oSov epxofieOa ^eXTLGTrjv ovGav iroXeGL KaTOLKiGecov irepi 
Kal vopLodeGLOJV. 10 

KA. Kat TToXv ye. 

A0. Aeye Srj tolvvv to tovtols €^rJ9' ti? 6 KaTOiKit,6- e 
fjL€vos vpLLV Aecus" ccTTat; TTOTepov i^ aTrdGTjg KptJTTjs 6 eOe- 
XojVy cos dxXov TLVOs iv Tals iroXeGiv cKdoTaig yeyevr^pbivov 
rrXeiovos tj KaTa ttjv eV ttjs yrjs Tpo<j>rjv ; ov ydp ttov tov 
povX6pL€v6v ye EAArjvcov ovvdyeTe. /catrot Tivds vpLcv eK 5 
T€ "Apyovs dpd) Kal Alyivr]s Kal dXXoOev twv ^^XXtjvojv els 
TTjv x^P^^ KaTcvKLGpLevovs. TO Sc Stj TTapov TjfJilv, Xcye, 708 
TTodev eGeGdai (f)fjs GTpaTorrehov tojv ttoXltcov Ta vvv ; 

Ki\. "E/c re KpT^TT^S" GVjjLTTdGTjs eoLKev yevrjoeGOac, Kal 
Tojv dXXojv he ^'EXXrjVOJV /xdAtar' <du > /jlol <j)aivovTai tovs 
diTO lieXoTTOvvriGOV irpoG^e^aG dai gvvolkovs . Kal ydp o vvv c 
h-q XeyeiSy dXrjdes (j)pdl,eLS, ojs e^ "Apyovs euGtv, Kal to ye 
pidXiGT evSoKifjiovv Ta vvv evddSe yevos, to TopTVViKov eK 
FopTvvos yap Tvyxdvec aTrcpKrjKos TavTTjs ttjs YleXoTTOvvrj- 

GiaKTJS. 

A0. Ov TOLVVV evKoXos ofjLOLWs yiyvoLT dv 6 /carot/ctcr/xos' b 
rat? TToXeGLV, OTav firj tov twv eGfJidjv ylyvrjTat, TpoTTov, ev 
yevos dTTO pLids Idv x^P^^ olKit^r^Tai, (j)iXov irapd cj)iX(xiv, 
GTevoxcopla tlvI iroXiopKiqdev yrjs rj tlglv dXXocs tolovtols 
TraOripiaGiv dvayKaoOev. eoTLv S' oTe Kal GTdoeocv ^ta^o- 5 
fievov dvayKatyOLT dv eTepojoe diro^evovGdai iroXeajs rt 
pLopLov tJStj Se 770T6 Kal GwdiTaoa ttoXls tlvojv e<f)vy€V, 
dphrfv KpeuTTOVL KpaT-qOelaa noXepicp. raur* ovv irdvT^ eoTl 
TTJ puev paoj KaTOLKl^eodaL re /cat vopLoOeTeiGdaL, ttj Se p^aAe- c 

121 



38 C nAATONOS 

TTwrepa. ro fjueu yap ev tl etvau yivos 6}x6(j)OJvov /cat ofiovofiov 
€;^€t TLva (j)LXiaVy kolvcjvov lepchv ov /cat rcjv tolovtcov 
TTavTWv, vofxovs S' irepovs /cat TroAtretas" aAAas" tojv olkoOcv 

^ ovK €V7T€Tajs dv^x^Tac, ro 8 eviore TTOV-qpia vojjlojv icrra- 
crta/cos" /cat 8ta ovvT^deLav ^rjrovv ert XPV^^^^ rot? avrol^ 
TJdeGLV St' a /cat TTporepov icfyOapt], x^Xerrov rep KaroLKL- 

d ^ovTL /cat vopLoderovvTi /cat ^vcTTreides yiyver ai' ro S' au 
TravToSaTTOV €$■ raurov ovveppvqKos yevos viraKovaaL pL€V 
TLVOJV vopLCOv Kaivcbv rdxo, dv i6 eXijaeic p,dXXov, ro Se gv/jl- 
TTvevcrai, /cat KaOaTrep lttttojv ^evyos /ca^' eva elg ravrov, ro 

r XeyofJLevov, GVjji(f)vorfj(jaL, xp^^^^ TroAAoy /cat 7ray;!^aAe770v. 
dAA' ovrios earlv vopbodeala /cat TrdAeoiv OLKLGfJiol Trdvrcov 
reXewrdriov irpog dperrjv dvSpcov. 

KA. Et/cos" 07727 S' av ^Xiirajv rovr e'lprjKas, <f>pdl,^ en 
(ja<f>€ar€pov. 

e A0. ^Qyaddy €Ot/ca Trcpt vopLoOerajv iiravLajv /cat oKoirajv 
a/xa e/[)€tv rt /cat <f)avXov' aAA' eav tt/jos" Kaipov riva Xeyajfiev, 
Trpdypi* ovhev yiyvoir dv en. /catVot rt Trore Svax^poLLvaj ; 
GX^^ov yap roL irdvra ovrcos eot/c €;^€tv to. dvOpcoinva. 

^ KA. ToO S77 77-ept Acyets"; 

700 A0. "E/xcAAov Aeyetv c^S" ouSetS" ttotc dvdpwiTOJV ovhev 

vopLoOereZy Tu;^at 8e /cat GVfi<f)opal rravroZai rriTTrovGai irav- 

roicjjs vofjLoderovGL rd Trdvra rjp,LV. 7) ydp TroAe/zos" ns 

jStaaa/xevos" dverpeipe TToXireias /cat p^eri^aXe v6p.ovs, r^ 

c TTevias x^^^'^V^ diropia' TToXXd he /cat vocrot dvayKdl,ovGi 
/catvoTO/x€tv, XoipLcov re ipLTnTrrovrcov, /cat xpo^ov eTrl ttoXvv 
eviavrcjv TToXXchv iroXXaKis a/catptac;. ravra Srj Trdvra 
TTpo'Chcov ns a^eiev dv elireZv direp eyd> vvvBt], ro dvrjrwv /xev 

b pLTjSeva vopLoderelv pLTjhev, rvxcL9 8' elvai gx^Sov drravra 
rd dvdpcoTTLva 7Tpdyp,ara' ro 8' eGriv irepi re vavriXiav /cat 
KV^epvrjrLKTjv /cat larpcKrjv /cat GrparrjyiKvv Trdvra ravr* 
ehrovra hoKelv ev Xeyeiv, aXXd ydp d/xotcos" av /cat rdSe 

c €CTTtv Xeyovra ev Xeyeuv ev rols avrols rovroig. ■ ^f> 

KA. To TTolov; 

A0. 'iQs" ^eds" /xev Trdvra i /cat jLterd, ^eou Ty;^?^ /cat Kaipos 
rdvOpcoTTLva BiaKV^epvcJoGt, GvpLTravra' r^pLepajrepov pLTjv rpirov 

C crvyx^PV^^'' '^ovroLs 8etv eneGdai rexvrjv Kaipcb ydp x^t-' 
p,d)vo£ GvXXa^eodat KV^epvrjnKrjv t) p,ij, /xeya TrXeoveKrrjpLa 
eyo^y ai^ ueiTjv. rj ttojs; 

122 



N0MI2N A 709 c 

KA. OvTws. 

A0. OifKovu /cat TOLS ctAAots" (haavTCog [Kara Tov avrov 5 
av €xoL Xoyov] Kal Srj /cat vo^odeaia ravrov tovto Soreov 
Tcov dXXojv crufiTTLTTTOVTCov , OGa Set X^P9- (^vrv)(€Zvy et [xeXkoL 
TTore evSatfxovaJS olKrjG€LV, rov vofxoderrjv aXr^deias ix6fJi€vov 
rfj Toiavrrj TrapaTTecjeZv iKaorore TrdAet heiv. 

KA. ^AXrjOeaTara Aeyet?. 10 

A0. OvKovv o ye ttpos eKaarov rt rayv elprjfjbevcov excov d 
TTjv rexyriv kov ev^audaC ttov Swatro opdcos rt Tvapov avro) 
Sta rvx^jS TTJs rexvrjs av fxovov eVtSeov; 

KA. Haw /xev ovv. 

A0. Ot re aAAot ye 8r) Tvavreg ol vvvStj prjdivreSi /ceAeuo- 5 
fievoL r7]v avTCtJV evx^v etVetJ', etVotev av, rj yap; 

KA. Tt fJLi^v; 

A0. Tavrov 8t) /cat vo/xoderTj^ olfxaL Spdaei. 

KA. *'Eyajy' olfJuaL. 

A0. " Oepe 817, vofjLoOera," vpog avrov cfxjijfJLev, '* rt gol 10 
Kol TTajS" ttoXlv €Xovaav Sco/xev, o Xa^cbv e^ets" coctt' e/c rcui' e 

XoLTTCOV aVTOS TY]V TToXlV LKaVCJS ^LOLKTJdaL ; " 

KA. Tt /xera rovr elireZv opdcos eanv dpa; 
A0. Tow vofjLoOerov (f)pd^ofjL€v tovto, rj yap; 

KA. Nat. , ^ , „ , 5 

A0. ToSe* " TvpawovfJL€V7]v fJLOL 86t€ Tr}v TToXiv/' cfyijoreL' 
** Tvpawos S' ecTTCo veos" /cat fjLV'qfjLa>v Kal evfJiaOrjg /cat avSpetos" 
/cat iJL€yaXo7rp€7rr)9 <j>vaeL' o Se /cat eV rots* TTpoadev eAeyo/xev 
Setv €7T€adai GvpLTracnv tols ttJs" dpeTrjs puepeaL, /cat vw t^ 
Tvpdvvoxj ^vxf] 'TOVTO avv€7T€a6a), idv piiXXrj tcjv dXXojv 710 
VTrapxovTOJV 6<f)€Xos elvai tlJ' 

KA. Hco(f)po(JVV7]v piOL SoKeZ (f)pdi^€LVf (5 MeytAAe, SetJ^ 
etvat TTJV GVV€7TopL€vrjv 6 ^evos. "^ ydp; 

A0. Trjv BtjplcoSt] ye, co KAetvta, /cat ovx '^^ Tt? aepuvvvcov 5 
av Aeyot, (fypovrjCLV rrpouavayKdt^ajv etvai to crco(f)pov6Zv, 
dAA' OTTep €vdv£ TTaiGLV /cat drfpioiSy toZs pL€v aKparojg e;\;etv 
TT/oos" Ta? TySovas", GvpicjiVTov iiravdeZ, toZs he ey/cparcSs" o 
/cat pLovovpLcvov €(l)apL€v Tcov TToXXcov dyadcbv XeyopLevojv ovk b 
d^Lov €LvaL Xoyov. e;^eTe ya/3 o Aeya> ttou. 

KA. Havu pL€V ovv. 

A0. TavTTjv TOLvvv rjpiZv 6 Tvpawos tt^v (/>vaLV 
ix^Tix) TTpos eK^ivais rats ^vaeaLV, el pueXXei ttoXl^ cos 5 

123 



710 b nAATi2N0^j 

Bvvarov ian rd^LGra /cat dpLcrra G)(rjG€LV TToXireuav 
7JV Xa^ovaa evSaL/jLOvearara Sid^ei. ddrrajv yap ravrr^s 
/cat dfJieLVCov TToAtretas' hiddeuLS ovr eonv ovr" dv TTore 
yivovTO. 
C KA. HcDs" St^ /cat TtVt Adyo) tovtOj co ^eVe, Xeyojv dv tls 
opdcos XeyeLV avrov TreidoL; 

A0. 'PaStdv 7TOV TOVTO ye voelv ear , (L KAetvta, /caret 
<f)-UGLV (hs eaTL rovd^ ovrco. 
5 KA. Hcbs XeyeLs; et rvpavvos yevoiro, (f>'ljS3 V€os, gcj- 
(jypojVy €vp,a67Js, pbvrjixcjVj dvSpelos, jjLeyaXoTTpeTnjs ; 

A0. ^vrvx^js, TTpoaOes, pirj /car' aAAo, aAAd to yeveudai 
T€ €77* avTOV vopboderrjv d^iov evratVou, /cat rtva tvx^JV els 
d raurdv dyayeti^ avroi. yevofievov yap tovtov, Trdvra G)(eh6v 
aTreipyaGrai rw deep, drrep orav ^ovXrjOfj hiacjyepovTaJS ev 
TTpd^ai Tti^a ttoXiv. Sevrepov Se, idv irore TLves 3uo dp)(ovr€s 
yiyvojVTai rocovroiy rpirov S' av /cat /caret Xoyov djGavTOJS 
5 -)(aXe7T(I)T€pov oGcp TrXeiovs, ogco 8' evavriovy evavriojs. 

KA. 'E/c Tvpavvihos dpiGTiqv (^fjs yeveGdai ttoXlv dvy d)s 

^aivrjy puerd vopLoderov ye d/cpou /cat rvpdvvov KOGpLLOV, /cat 

paGrd re /cat rdxi'O^T* dv puera^aXelv els rovro €/c rou rotoi;rou, 

e Sevrepov Se e^ oXuy apneas y t) ttcos Xeyeis; [/cat rd rpirov 

e/c SrjpLOKparias.] 

A0. OwSa^LtcDs, dAA* e/c rvpavvlhos piev Trpcorov, Bevrepov 
Se e/c ^aGiXLKrjs rroXirelas y rpirov he e/c rtvos" SrjpLOKparlas- 
5 ro Se reraproVy oXiyap^lay rrjv rod roLovrov yeveoLV ;\;aAe- 
TTwrara Swatr* dv irpoahe^aadai' irXeloroL ydp ev avrfj 
Svvdarat ylyvovrai. Xeyopuev Srj ravra ylyveadai rorey 
orav dXrjdrjs piev vopuoderrjs yevrjraL <j)VGeL, kolvtj 3e avrcp 
ns GvpLpfj pcopLT] TTpos rovs ev rfj rroXec pueyiGrov Swapuevovs' 
711 ov S' dv rovro dpcdpLO) piev ^pa^vraroVy iGX^porarov 8e, 
Kaddirep ev rvpavvlhiy yevrjraiy ravrrj /cat rore rd^os /cat 
paGrcovTj rijs piera^oXrjs ylyveodai ^tAet. 
KA. ricDs"; ov ydp piavddvopiev. 
5 A0. Kat piTjv e'lprjral y* rjpLiv ov)( drra^ dAA' ot/xat ttoA- 
Ad/cts" vpieXs Se rd;\;a ovSe redeaode rvpavvovpiev7]v rroXiv. 
KA. Ou3e ye eTndvpurjrrjs eyojy elpX rod dedpiaros . 
b A0. Kat piTjv rovro y' dv 'ISols ev avrfj ro vvvSrj Xeyo- 
pievov. 

KA. To TToZov; 

124 



NOMfiN A 711b 

A0. 0-uBev Set TTOvojv ovSe rtvog TrafXTToXXov XP^^^"^ '^^ 
Tvpdvvco fjiera^aXetv ^ovXrjdevri, TroAedos" yjOrj, TropeveaOat Se 5 
avTOv Set TrpcoTOV ravrr], oTTjjrrep dv ideXtjarj, idv re Trpos 
dperrjs iTnrrjSevfjLara, TrporpeTreaOat rov? TToXiras, eav re eTTt 
Tovvavriov y avrov Trpcjrov Trdvra vTroypdcfyovra raJ TTparretv, 
rd fjL€V €7TaivovvTa /cat Tt/xcoi/ra, rd S' av rrpos ipoyov dyovra, C 
Kal TOP fJLTj jreidofjievov dripidt^ovTa Kad^ eAcacrra? rajv TTpd^ecou. 

KA. Kat TTcDs" olo/Jieda raxv ovvaKoXovdrjaeiv rovg dXXovs 
TToXcrag tw ttjv rotavrrjv TTeidoj Kal afxa ^iav elXrj^ori; 

A0. M^ySets" r]ixds TTetderoj, co ^tAot, ciAAt^ ddrrov /cat 5 
pdov fjLera^dXXeLV dv irore ttoXiv tovs vojjlovs rj rfj tojv 
Swaarevovrcov rfye/jLovLa, /xT^Se vvv ye dXXr) yiyveadai fjurjS 
avdis TTore yevrjaeadai, /cat ydp ovv rjfjitv ov rovr €gtlv 
aovvarov ovoe ;;^aAe7Tajs' olv yevofievov aAAa too ecrrt to a 
XclXcttov yeveadac, /cat oXtyov Sr) to yeyovo? iv tw ttoXXco 
Xpdvcpy oTav Se ovfi^fj, pLvpia Kal TrdvT* iv TToAet ayada 
d7T€pydt,€TaLy iv fj ttot dv iyyevrjTat. 

KA. To 7TOLOV 8r) Xeyeis; 5 

A0. ''Orav epco? BeZos tcov Gaxfypovajv re /cat St/catcov eTrt- 
TrjSevpLdTcov iyyivrjTai pbeydXais tlgIv Svi^aCTretats", 7] /caret 
fjLOvapx^oLy SvvaaTevovaatg -^ /cara ttXovtcov VTrepoxds Sta- 
cf)€povaai,s rj yevcJov, 7) ri^v Necrro/90S' eav TTore rt? eTraveveyKr] e 
<f)VGLV, ov TTJ Tov XiycLV p(i){Jir) ^acrt irdvTWv Stevey/covra 
dvdpcoTTCov rrXiov ert roj aaxfypoveXv Sta(^epetv. rour ouv 
cm /xev Tpotas", cSs" ^aat, yeyovev, e^' rjpidjv Se ovSafiojs, 
et S' ow yeyovev -^ /cat yevTyaerat rotouro? '^ vw 7^/xtv euTiv 5 
rts", /xa/captcus" ftev auros" ^77, p^aKdpcoi Se ot GVvrjKOOi tojv 
iK TOV GO)(f)povovvT09 OTopiaTO^ lovTOJv Xoycov. cbaavTCOs Se 
/cat ovpLTrdarjs 8vvdpL€OJS 6 avTO^ Tripe Xoyos, cLs OTav et? 
TavTOV Tip (l)pov€LV T€ Kal Gox^poveXv Tj pbeyLGTrj Swa/xts" ev 7^2 
dvdpcoTTO) ovpLTriar], TOTe TroAtreta? rT^s" dpLGTr}? Kal vopaov 
TOJV TO LOVTOJV <j)V€Tai yiv€Gis, dXXoj^ Se ov pLTj TTore yivrjTai. 
TavTa pL€V ovv KaOaTvepel puvdos tls Xex^els /ce;j^/)T70"/Lta)Si7cr^6t) 
/cat eTnSeSeLxBoj ttj pikv ;\;aAe7rov ov to ttoXlv evvopuov yt- 5 
yveadac, Tjj S\ etTrep yivoiTO o AeyojLtev, irdvTOJv Tdxi^crrov 
T€ /cat pduTOv jLta/cpcD. 

KA. ita)9; 

A0. TieipojpLeda TTpoaappiOTTOVTeg tjj TroAet o^ot, KaOdirep b 
TratSes" Trpecrj^urat, TrAarretv ro) Adyoj rous" vopLovs. 

125 



712 b nAATON02 

KA. "Icofi€v St] Kal fJUTj ^eAAct)/X€V ert. 
A0. 0eov Srj 77/30? T'^v rrjs rroXecos KaracrKevrjv eTTt/caAdS- 
5 fjLeda' 6 Se aKOVGeUv re, Kal OLKOvaas tXecos evfxevrjs re 'qixZv 
eXdoc avvSiaKOGfirjaajv Tifjv re ttoXlv kol rovs vo/jlovs. 
KA. "EA^ot yap ovv. 

A0. 'AAAa Tiva hrj rrore TVoXireiav €XOfJL€V iv v(x> rjj 
C TToXei TTpooraTTeiv; 

KA. Olov St] tl Xeyeis ^ovXr^Oeig; (f>pdC '^'^^ cra<^e- 
arepov. olov SrjfxoKparLav nva ^ oXiyap^iov '^ apiaroKpariav 
Tj ^aoiXiKTiv ; ov yap Sr) rvpawiha yi ttov XeyoLs dv, cos* y 
5 r)pb€LS dv olrjdeLjJLev. 

A0. Oe/oe Srj roivvv, TTorepos vficov aTTOKpivaadaL rrpo- 
repos dv iSeXoi, rrjv olkol iroXireiav ecTTcbv ris tovtojv iariv ; 
ME. yicov ovv tov TTpeo^vrepov ipue hiKaiorepov eiirelv 
TTporepov; 
d KA. naojs. 

ME. Kat pi'r]v Gvvvocov ye, c5 feW, ttjv iv AaAce8at/xovt 

TToXireiav ovk exo) aoc (^pd^eiv ovrojs '^vnva TrpoaayopeveLv 

avrrjv Set. /cat ydp rvpavviSi So/cet jLtot 77/oocreot/ceVat — ro 

5 ydp Tcov i(f)6pajv OavfiaGrCj^ cos rvpavviKov iv avrfj yiyove 

— /cat Tts" eviore jjlol (Jjaiverat, nao-ajv rcbv TToXecov SrjfMOKpa- 

T0Vjui€V7] fidXccTT eot/ceVat. to h^ av pir] <f)dvaL dpiaroKpariav 

e avrrjv elvai TravraTraaiv droTTOV /cat jLtei^ Srj jSacrtAeta ye 

8ta ^Lov r' iarlv iv avrfj /cat dpxo.iOTdrrj Traacov /cat tt/dos- 

TrdvTCov dv6pa)7TCOv /cat rjpicjav avrcJov Xeyofievr]. iyd) Se ovrco 

vvv i^aL(l)V7j£ dvepcoTT^^ets", dvrajSj direp €L7tov, ovk €-)(oj 

5 Siopiadfjievos etVetv rt? tovtojv ecrrtv rcDv TroAtretoiv. 

KA. TavTOV cot irdBoSi to MeytAAe, KaTa^aivopuaL ire- 
TTOvdivai' Trdvv ydp diTopoj ttjv iv Kvcoacp TroAtretW tovtojv 
TLvd 8uaxvpc^6pL€vo£ etTretv. 

A0. "OvTOJS ydp, CO dpLCTTOL, 7ToXlT€LCOV pL€T€X^T€' (5? Se 

lo (hvopidKapiev vvv, ovk elalv TioAtretat, ndXeajv Se ot/CTycretS" 

713 Searro^opievajv re /cat SouAeuofcroiv puepeGLV iavTCov rtcrt, to toO 

Seo-TTOTOU Se eKaaTT) TrpoaayopeveTai KpdTOS. XPW ^ ^trrep 

Tou TOLOVTOV TTJV TToXiV eSet e7TOVOjLta^eo"^at, to tou dXrjdoJs 

TCOV [tov] vovv ixdvTOJV SecTTo^ovTOs deov ovopua Xiy eodai. 

5 KA. TtV S' o ^eo?; 

A0. ^A/0 oi;v pivdcp apLLKpd y' ert 7TpoaxpT]crTeoVy el pLeX- 
XopLev ipipLeXcos ttojs SrjXcoaaL to vvv ipcoTcopuevov ; 

126 



NOMfiN A 713 a 

KA. OvKovv XPV '^^^'^V ^pctv ; 

A0. Hdvv jxev ovv. rcjv yap 8rj ttoXcwv Jjv e/JLTrpocde 
ra? GvvoLK'q(7€L9 Si'^Xdo/xev, €tl irporepa tovtcov TrdpLiToXv D 
Aeyerat ns d-px^} re koI oIktjgls yeyovevai iiTL ¥s.p6vov puaX 
€v8aLfjLa>v, rjs fjLLfjirjfxa exovGoi ianv rjrcg rcov vvv dpicrra 
OLKelrai. 

KA. lucpoop av, OJ9 €Olk , eur] irepi avrrjg oeov aKOveiv. 5 

A0. 'EjLtot yovv <j)alv€TaL- 8to /cat Trapijyayop avrrjv els 
TO p,€aov rots Aoyots". 

KA. ^Opdorard ye Spdjv /cat rov ye e^rjs Trepaivcuv dv 
fivdoVj etTTep TTpoGtJKOJV eoTiv, jLtaA 6p6d)9 dv ttololtjs. C 

A0. Apaareov a>s" Xeyere. (fytjfjirjv roivvv TrapaSe- 
heypLeda rrjs toju rore /xa/captas" ^ojrjs d)9 d(j)dovd re /cat 
avTopLara Trdvr elxev. tj Se rodrojv alria Aeyerat rotaSe 
Tts". yLyviouKOJv 6 Y^povos dpa, Kaddirep rfp^eZs 8ieXr]Xvdap.ev, 5 
COS" dvdpcxjTTeia (f)dai<s ovSepLta LKavrj rd dvdpdimva hioiKovaa 
avTOKpdrojp Trdvray pur) ovx v^peojs re /cat aSt/ctas" pLecrrov- 
adaCy rauT* ovv Suavoovpievos e(f)LaTrj rore ^aaiXeas re /cat 
dpxovras rat? TToXeuLV rjpLCJV, ovk dvOpojTTOVs dXXd yevovg Q 
deiorepov re kol dpieivovos, SaipLOvas, olov vvv rjpLeis Spcjpiev 
TOLS TTOipuviois /cat ogcjjv rjpepoi elacv dyeXac ov ^ovs ^ocov 
ovSe atyas" alydjv dpxovras rroLovpiev avrolai rivaSy dXX 
iqpLeXs avTCtJv SeaTTO^o/xev, dpLeivov eKeivojv yevos. ravrov 8rj 5 
/cat o 6e6s [dpa /cat] <j)LXdvdp(j07TOS cuv, [ro] yevos dpieivov rj- 
pidjv e^tcrrry to rwv Saipovcov, o Sta TToXXrjs puev avrots paarco- 
V7]£y TToXXrjs S' rjpiXv, empeXovpevov rjpojv, elpr^vrjv re /cat atSoj C 
/cat evvopLiav /cat dcjyOoviav Slktjs irapexdpievov, daraaLaara 
/cat evSaupLOva rd rcov dvdpcoTrojv dTrrjpyd^ero yevrj. Xeyei 
8rj /cat vvv ovros 6 Xoyos, dXyjOeia xP^P'^^os, cos ogojv dv 
TToXeojv pLTj deos dXXd ns dpxD dvrjros, ovk eanv /ca/ccov 5 
avroLS ovSe ttovcov dvd<^v^i£' dXXd pLLpLelaBai 8eZv rjpids 
oterat rrdar^ pirjxo-vfj "tov eirl rov K.p6vov Xeyopuevov ^iov, 
/cat OGOV iv rjpLLV ddavaatas eveart, rovrco jreiOopievovs Srj- 
pLoaia /cat t8ta rds t' ot/cryaets' /cat rds rroXeis Stot/cetv, rrjv 7^4 
rov vov SLavopLTjv errovopdt^ovras vopov. el 8 dvdpcoTTOS els 
7) oXiyapxla ris» rj /cat Sr^pLOKparia ifjvx'rjv exovaa rjSovcjv 
/cat erriBvpLicov opeyopievrjv /cat TrXripovadaL rovrcov Seop,evr^v, 
ureyovoav 8e ovhev dXX avqwrco /cat dTrXiqarcp /ca/co) [vocTTy- 5 
/xart] avvexopievrjv, dp^ei Srj TToXeojs yj nvos ISicorov /cara- 

127 



714 a nAATfiNOS 

TTarrjoas 6 tolovtos rovs vojjlovs, o vvvStj iXeyofxev, ovk eorn 
aojTTjpias iJurj^CLvq . uKOTretv Srj Set tovtov tov Xoyov rjfjids, 
b CO KXecvla, irorepov avro) TTeiao/jieda 'q ttcjs hpaaofxev. 
KA. ^AvdyKT] Stjttov rreideadai. 

A0. 'Ei^voets" ovv OTL vojJLOJV e'lSr] rivis (jyaGiv ctvat to- 
aavra oaaTrep TToXireiajv, TroAtretcDv 8e dpn SLeXrjXvdafiev 

5 oaa XeyovcLV ol ttoXXol; firj Srj <j)avXov Trepi vofiiarjs etvat, 
TTjv vvv ajj,ij)i(j^rjTriaiv , rrepl Se rod fieyLarov to yap hiKaiov 
Kal dSiKov ol XPV ^XeTTeiv, irdXiv rjpuv djji(f)i(j^r]ToviJL€Vov 
eXrjXvdev. ovt€ yap irpos tov iroXepiov ovt€ Trpos dpeTTjv 

C oXrjv ^XeTTeiv Setv <f>a(jL tovs vofiovs, dAA' tJtls dv Kade- 
GTTjKVLa fj TToAtreta, TavTrj iSelv to crvfji(f)€pov, ottcos dp^et 
T€ del Kal firj AcaraAv^T^crerat, Kal tov <j>vaei opov tov hiKaiov 
Xeyeadai KdXXiaO^ ovtcjj. 

5 KA. ITajs-; 

A0. ''On TO TOV KpeiTTOVOS crvfJL(j>€pov icTLV, 

KA. Aey' ^Tt aa(f)€GT€pov. 

A0. ^QSe. TideTat Stjttov, <j)a(jiv, tovs vo/jlovs iv ttj 
TToXei €Kdo-TOT€ TO KpaTOVv . Tj ydp ; 
10 KA. ^AXrjdrj Xiyeis. 

d A0. '^Ap* ovv OL€L, (f)aaLV, 7TOT€ Srjfjbov viKrjcravTa, rj TLva 
TToXiTelav dXXrjv, 7) Kal Tvpavvov, drjoeadai eKovTa irpos dXXo 
TL TTpcoTOV v6fiov£ Tj TO uvjji^ipov iavTCp TTJs dp')(fjs TOV fieveiv ; 
KA. ITcDs' yap dv; 
5 A0. OvKovv Kal o£ dv TavTa ra TeOivTa TTapa^aLvrj^ 
KoXdaei 6 depLEVos d)S dSt/cowra, StKata etvat, TavT inovo- 
fjid^ojv; 

KA. "Eot/ce yovv. 

Aiy . 1 avT ap act /cat ovtcj Acat TavTT] to oiKaiov av ey^oi, 
10 KA. ^Tjol yovv ovTOS 6 Xoyos. 

A0. "E(TTt ydp TOVTO €V iK€LVa)V TCOV d^lWJJLdTWV 

e OLpx^js TvepL. 

KA. Y[oi(x)v hrj; 

A0. Tibv a t6t€ €7T€aK07TOVpL€Vy TLVaS TLVOJV dpX^LV Set. fl 

Acat €(f)dvr] Sr) yovias jxev eKyovcov, vecoTepcov Se irpeo^VTe- \ 
5 pov9, yevvaiovs Se dyevvojv, Kal GV)(y* drra tjv dXX , et 
fiepLVT^pLeda, Kal e/x7roSta erepa ere/ootcrt* Acat 8rj Kal iv rjv 
715 avTWV TOVTO, Kal €(f)afjL€V 7TOV " Acard cf)vcnv " tov YlivSapov 
" dyetv StAcatowra to ^tatdrarov," cos (f)avaL. 

128 



N0M12N A 715 a 

KA. Nat, ravT rjv a rore iXexdyj- 

A0. TiKOTTei St) TTorepot? rcalv rj ttoXls t^jjav iariv Trapa- 
Sorea. yeyovev yap hrj ^vpiaKis rjS'q to tolovtov €v rtcrt 5 
TToAecrty. 

KA. To TTolov; 

A0. ^Ap)(a>v TTepifjiax'TiJTCov yevofxevojv, ol vLKrjaavTes rd 
T€ TTpdyjjLara Kara ttjv ttoXlv ovtco^ iacfyereptaav cr^dSpa, 
a>(7T€ OLpx^S 1^1]^^ oTLOvv fjLeraStSovaL rot? r^rr-qBelaiVy fjajre 10 
avTOLS fJLijre eKyovoiSy rrapacjivXarTOvres Se dXXrjXovs ^wglv, 
OTTOJS jJbTj TTore Tig ets" dpx'rjv d(f)LK6iJL€VO£ iTTavaarfj fjuefjuvrj- b 
fjLevog Tojv efiTrpoordev yeyovorojv KaKcov. ravras hrjTTOv 
cf)afjLev rjfjL€LS vvv out etvat TToXireias, ovt* dpdovs vofxovs 
oCTOt pLTj crujjLTTdarjs rrjs TToXeoJs eVe/ca rod kolvov iredrjaav 
ot 8' ev€Kd TLVCoVy araGLcoTas aAA' ov TToXtrag rovrovg (f)a- 5 
fjLev, Kal rd rovrcov StVata a (fyaaiv elvai, ^xdnqv elprjadac. 
Xeyerat Se rovS eVe/ca ravd tj/jLlv, ws TjfjieXg rfj afj rroXei 
apxoLS ovo on ttAovglos eariv ris ocjaojxev, ovo on rcov 
TOLOijrcov (lAAo ovSev KeKr-qpuivos , Ig^vv t) fieyedog rj n c 
yivos' OS 8' dv roZs redeiGL vopLois evireLOeGraros re fj /cat 

VLKa TaVTTjV TTjV VLKTjV iv Tjj TToAet, TOVTO) (f)afJL€V Kal TTjV 

Tcjv decov VTTTjpeGLav horiov etyat rr^v fxeyLGry^v rep TTpcorcp, 
Kal Semepav ro) rd Sevrepa Kparovvn, Kal Kard Xoyov ovroj 5 
rols i(f)€^rj£ rd p.erd ravd c/cacrra aTToSoreov elvat. rovs 
8' dpxovras Xeyouivovs vvv virrfpiras rots vofioLs eVaAecra 
ovn KaLVorofJLLas ovop^anov kv€Ka, aXX T^you/xat iravros d 
p,dXXov elvai irapd rovro Gojrrjpiav re noXei Kal rovvavriov . 
€V fj pL€v ydp dv dpxopievos fj Kal aKvpos vopuog, (jydopdv 
opoj rfj roLavrrj eroipLrjV ovGav ev fj 8e dv^eGirorrjs rojv 
dpxovrojv y ol he dpxovres hovXoi rod v6p.ov, GOjr-qplav Kal 5 
irdvra OGa deol rroXeGiv ehoGav dyaSd ytyvopLeva Kadopoj. 

KA. Nat /xd Ata, 60 ^eve' Kad* rjXiKLav ydp o^v ^Xeireis. 

A0. Neos" piev ydp ajv irds dvdpcjjiTOs rd roiavra dpu- 
^Xvrara avrog avrov opa, yepojv he o^vrara. q 

KA. *AXr]deGrara. 

A0. Tt hr) ro pLera ravra; dp ovx 7]KOvras p^ev Kal 
rrapovras dwpLev rovs eiroiKovs, rov 8' e^yjs avroZs hia- 
irepavreov dv etry Xoyov ; c 

KA. ncDs" ydp ov; 

A0. " "Avhpes " roivvv (f)djp,ev jrpos avrovs, " o piev 8i] 

VOL.1 129 K 



715 e nAATONOS 

Oeog, a)G7T€p /cat o TraAatos" Xoyos, Oipx'qv re Kal rcXevTrjv Kal 

716 fxeaa rajv ovr ojv arrdvrojv €^ojv, evdeia Trepaivei Kara (/)Vglv 
TTepiTTopevofievog' rep Se aet avv€7T€Tai Slkt) tojv amoX^iTro- 
pLevojv rod deiov vofiov njjicopos, rjs 6 piev evSatpLOVTJaeLV 
p^eXXcov ixopi€vos avveTrerai raireivos Kal K€K0GpL7jpL€VO£y o 

5 8e Tts" e^apdels vtto pLeyaXavxt^OLS , ■^ xprjpiaGiv iTracpopiCvos 
'q npiaZsj Tj Kol acopLaro? €vpLop<j>ia apua v€6tt]tl /cat avoia 
(jyXeyeraL rrjv j/fi;;^7)v /xe^' v^peojs, cos" ovt€ dpxovros ovre 
rivos rjyepLovos Seopuevos, aXXd /cat aAAotS" Ikovos (x)V rjyet- 
b adaLy /caraAetTrerat eprjpLos deov, /caraAet^^ets" Se /cat en 
dXXovs TOiovrovs rrpoaXa^cbv cr/ctpra rapdrrcov navra a/xa, 
/cat TToAAots" TLGLV eho^€v elvai rts*, /xera Se xP^vov ov ttoXvv 
VTToaxoJV Tipiojpiav ov pLepLTrrrjv rfj Slkt] iavTov re /cat oIkov 

5 /cat TToAtv dphrjv dvactrarov eTTOirjoev. irpos ravr ovv ovrco 
SiareraypLeva ri XPV ^P^^ V ^tavoetcr^at /cat rt pLrj top 

yf J >> 

epicppova; 

KA. AtJAov St^ rovTO ye' (hs tojv avvaKoXovdrjaovrajv 
iaopLevov rep deep 8et SiavorjdrjvaL navra dvhpa. 

C AG). " TtV ow hrj TTpd^is (f)iXr] /cat d/cdAoi»^os' dew; /xta, 
/cat cVa Adyov exovaa dpxo-ZoVy on rep puev 6p,oicp ro opuoiov 
oVrt pierpicp <^iXov dv elrjy rd 8 dpierpa ovre dXXijXois ovre 
roLS epupLerpcks. 6 Srj deos rjpiLV Trdvrojv XP'OP'^'^^^ pierpov 

5 dv eirj /xaAtCTTa, /cat ttoXv pidXXov rj ttov rt?, cjs ^aaiVy 
dvOpcjTTOS' rdv ovv rep roiovrcp TrpoGcjjiXrj yevrjcropievoVy els 
SvvapiLv on pidXiara /cat avrov roiovrov dvayKoiov yiyve- 

d cr^at, /cat /caret, rovrov Srj rov Xoyov 6 puev aoj^pcjv rjpLcov 
deep (f)iXoSy opLOLOs ydpy 6 Se purj aojcfypojv avopiOLOs re /cat 
hid^opoSy /cat <6> dhiKOSy /cat rd dXX ovrcos /cara rdv avrov 
Xoyov exec, vorjaajpiev Sr) rovroLS eiropievov etvai rov 

5 TOtdi^Se Adyov, dndvrojv KdXXuarov /cat dXrjdeararov ot/xat 
Adyo^i^, cos rep puev dyadep dveiv Kal TTpoGopLiXelv del rots' 
BeoZs evxoXs Kal dvadrjpbaoiv Kal avpLTrdarj depaTreiex deehv 
KoXXiorov Kal dpiorov Kal dwcLpLeorarov rrpos rov evhai- 

e piova ^Lov Kal Sr] Kal hia^epovrejjs TrpenoVy rep Se /ca/co) 
rovreov rdvavria 7reef)VKev. dKadapros ydp rrjv ifjvx'^v 6 ye 
KaKoSy Kadapos Se 6 evavriosy irapd Se puiapov Satpa ovre 

717 dvSp^ dyadov ovre Oeov eanv rrore ro ye opdov Sc^ea^at* 
pidrrjv ovv Trepl deovs rroXvs eon ttovos rots avoaiois, 
rolejw Se ouiois evKaiporaros diraGiv. gkottos p^ev ovv 

130 



N0M12N A 717 a 

TjfjLLV ovros 01U Set GTO-)(at^€(jdaL' ^iXt] Se avTOV /cat olov r^ 
Tols ^eXeoLv e^eats" ra Trot' ai^ Xeyofxeva opdorara (jyipoir* 5 
av ; TTpojTov fxivy ^a/xeV, npias ras /xer OXvpLTTiovs re /cat 
rovs TTjv ttoXlv €xovras deovs rots' x^^^^^^^ ^^ '^'-S' Q^oZs 
dpna [/cat Sevrepa] /cat dptGrepa vepLcov opdorara rod rrjs 
evGe^eias (jkottov rvyxdi^ot, ra Se rovrojv dvcxjQev [ra rrepirra] b 
/cat avricfyajva, roZs ep^irpoadev prjdetGLi' vvvSrj. fxerd deovs 
8e rovaSe /cat rots' haijjLoaiv 6 y€ €p.(j)pcov opytd^oir^ av, 
rjpa>GLV 8e /xera rourof?. eTraKoXovdoL S* awrots" ISpvpiara 
tSta TTarpcpojv decbv Kara vofjuov opyiat^ofxeva, yovicjv Se 5 
/xera ravra rt/xat ^ctJi^rcuv oT? dip,is ocfyeuXovra diroriveLV 
ra TTpojra re /cat jxeyiora o^etAT^yitara, XP^^JV iravrajv irpe- 
G^vrara, vopiil^eiv Se, a KeKrrjrai /cat e^et, Trdvra elvai rcjv 
yevv7]Gdvr<jJv /cat 6p€ipap,€i'a>v tt/oo? ro irapex^Lv avrd etV C 
VTTrjpeGLav €K€ivois Kara Swa/xtv iraGaVy dp^ppievov drro rrjs 
ovGias, Sevrepa ra rod Gwp,aro£, rpira ra rrjs ifjv)(J}£, diro- 
nvovra SaveiGpuara eTTtjiteAetas re /cat VTre pirovovvr cuv coStvas" 
TraAatas" eVt veots SavecGdeiGaSy diroSiSovra Se TraXatOLs iv 5 
roj 717)00, G(f)6Spa Kexprjp^evoig. napd Se Trdvra rov ^iov 
€X^t'V re /cat eGx^jKevai XPV "^P^S avrov yovias evcfyrjpbtav 
hLa(j)ep6vr(x>Sy Stort KOV(f)a)v /cat Trrrjvcjv Xoycjv ^apvrdrrj d 
l,rjp,La — Trdcrt ya/3 irriGKorros roZs Trepl ra rotavra irdx^r] 
At/cT^s" Ne/xeots ayyeAos — dvpiovpLevois re ow vireiKeiv Set 
/cat aTTOTTLpLTrXaGL rov dvpLov, idv r' ei^ Aoyots" eap' r' ev epyois 
SpdJGLV ro roLOvrov, GvyyiyvcjGKOvra, ws et/cora>s' pidXcGra 5 
Trarrjp vet So^d^ojv dSt/ceto^at dvpLolr^ av Biacfyepovrajs. 
reXevrrjGdvrojv Se yoveojv racjtri pL€v rj GOJcfypoveGrdrrj /caA- 
XiGrrjy pnqre virepalpovra rojv eWiGpLevcov oyKOJv p^rjr^ eAAet- 
TTOvra cbv ol Trpoiraropes rovs iavrcov yevvrjrd^ irudeGav, e 
ras" re av /car iviavrov rdJv rjSr] reXos ixovrcxjv wGavrojs 
eTTtjaeAetas" ras" KOGpiOV cf)€povGag aTToStSovat* rw Se /xi^ 
TTapaXeirreiv puv^p^rjv ivSeXex^j irapexopievoVy rovrcp pidXiGr 718 
det 7rp€G^€V€LV, SaTrdvTjs re rTys" StSo/xeV^^S" ^tto rvx^js ro 
p,€rpLOv rots' KeKpLT^KOGLV vefjiovra. ravr av TTOLovvres /cat 
/card ravra t,<jL)vres eKdGrore eKaGroL rrjv d^iav av irapd decov 
/cat ooot Kpeirroves -qp^cbv /co/xt^ot/xe^a, iv iXiTLGiv dyadals 5 
Stdyoi^es TO rrXeiGrov rod ^lov." a Se Trpos eKyovovs /cat 
cryyyevets /cat <j>iXovs /cat iroXiras, oGa re ^evt/cd tt/oos' ^ecuv 
depairevpiara /cat ofxiXias GvpiTTOvrcov rovrcov dnoreXovvra 

131 



i8b HAATfiNOS 

b Tov avTov piov <^atSpuva/xevov Kara vofxov KocrfjueTv Set, 
Twv vofjicov avTcbv 7] SU^oSos, ra fxev TreiOovGa, to, Se fxrf 
VTTelKOvra tt€l9oI tcov 'qdcjv ^ia /cat StV?^ /coAa^oucra, rrjv 
ttoXlv rjfxZv GVfjL^ovXrjdevTCov decbv fJuaKaplav re /cat evSat- 

5 jjLOva OLTToreXeL' a Se XPV f^^^ ^^ '^^^ avayKalov elrrelv 
vofJLoderrjv OGris direp iyoj Stavoeirat, iv he cr;^7y/xaTt vojjlov 
dvapfJLoarei Xeyojxeva, rovrojv rrepi So/cet pLOL <helv> Sety/xa 

C TTpoeveyKovra avrcp re /cat eKeivois ols vopuodenjaei, rd 
XoiTTCL TTOLvra els SvvapLLV hie^eXBovra, ro puerd rovro dp^e- 
udai rrjs deaeojs rcJov vopLCov. 

<KA.> "Ecrrtv 8e Srj rd roiavra ev rivi pidXiara G-)(rjpLarL 

5 KeipLeva; 

<A0.> Ot5 Trdvv paStou ev evl TrepiXafiovra elirelv avrd 
olov nvi rvTTO), dXX* ovrojcri, riva rporrov Xd^wpLev^ dv ri 
8vva)pLe6a Trepl avrcov ^e^aiajGaadai. 
KA. Aeye ro rrolov. 

lo A0. Bof Aot/x7yv dv avrovs cos" evTreideardrovs rrpos aperrjv 
elvaiy /cat hi^Xov on Treipdaerai rovro 6 vopLoderrjg ev anaorj 
TTOieZv rfj vopLodeala. 

d KA. IIcos" ydp ov; 

A0. Ta roivvv Srj Xe)(devra eSo^ev ri /xot npovpyov 
Spdv els ro Trepl ajv dv Trapacvfj, pLj] TTavraTraaiv wpurjs ^v)(fjs 
Xa^opieva, rjpLepcorepov re dv dKOveiv /cat evpuevearepov ware 

5 et /cat pLTj pueya rt, opuKpov 8e, rov dKOVOvra, OTrep (f>r]iil, 
evpLeveorrepov yiyvopievov evpiadearepov diTepydaeraiy Tidvu 
dyarrrjrov. ov ydp ttoXXiJ rt? evirereia ovhe d(f)6ovLa rcbv 
TTpodvpiovpLevajv ws dpiorcov on pLaXicrra /cat cos rap^tcrra 

e yiyveodaiy rov he 'HcrtoSov ol ttoXXoI GO(f)6v d7TO(j)aivov(Ji 
Xeyovra d>s yj piev errl rrjv KaKorrjra oh 6s Xeia /cat 
avtStrt TTapexei TTopeveadai, pidXa ^pa^eXa ovaa, rrjs he 
dperrjs, (J)7]glVj 

5 Ihpdjra Beol TrpoTrdpoidev edrjKav 

dBdvaroiy piaKpos he /cat opOtos otpLos es avrijv, 
7ig /cat rprjxvs ro Trpdjrov eirr^v h els dKpov t/C7yat, 

prjihiTj hrj Vetra (f)epeiv, x^^^'^V '^^P eouaa. 

KA. Kat KaXcos y eoLKev Xeyovn. 

A0. Udvv puev ovv. 6 he rrpodycjv Xoyos o ye pLOL 

132 



NOMfiN A 719 a 

aTTeipyaaraiy ^ovXojxai Vfiiv els to fidcrov avro Oetvai. 5 

KA. Tldei Sij. 

A0. Aeyajfiev Stj ra> vofxoOerrj SiaXeyofxevoL rdSe* " EtTre 
TjjJLlv, (L vofJLodera' elirep on XPV '^P^ttclv rji^ds Kal Xeyetv D 
€L0€L7]s, apa ov oTjAov OTL fcttt av eiTTOLS; 

KA. ^AvayKolov. 

A0. *' HfjLLKpo) fxev hrj TTpoaOev dpa ovk rjKOVGafjiev gov 
XiyovTOS (hs rov vofxoOerrjv ov Set rots' TTOLrjrais eTTirpeTreiV 5 
7TOL€LV o dv avTOis fj <j)iXov ; ov yap dv elSeXev rt ttot 
ivavTLOV Tols vojJLOLs dv Xdyovres ^Xa/nroiev rrjv ttoXcv. 

KA. *AXr]d7J fjLevTOL Xiyeis. 

A0 . *Y7T€p St] rcbv TTOL-qrwv el raSe Xeyotfiev irpos avrov, 
ap* dv rd X€)(devra elr] fxirpia; 10 

KA. riota; 

A0. TaSe* " riaAatos" fivOoSj cu vofJuoOera, vtto re avrcov C 
'qfjLOJv del Xeyofievos iariv Kal rots' aAAots" Trdaiv avvhe- 
SoypLcvos, ore Troirjri^s, oirorav iv ro) rpLTToSi rrjs M.ovGr)s 
KaOl^rjraL, rore ovk epi<f>pcx)v iarlv, olov Se Kprjvr] rts" to 
imov peZv iroipLCos id, Kal rrjs Te^v^S ovarjs piLpL7]G€a)s 5 
dvayKa^erai, ivavriajs dAAT^Aots" dvOpcoTTOVs ttolujv Startle - 
piivovs, evavria Xeyecv avrco TToXXaKLs, olSev Se ovr el ravra 
ovT el ddrepa dXrjdrj tojv Xeyopuevcov . tw Be vopLoderrj rovro d 
OVK eGTL TTOieZv ev rat vopuo), Svo irepl evos, dXXd eva irepi 
evos aet oet Aoyov aTTOcpaiveauaL. GKeipaL o eg avrojv 
TOJV VTTO GOV vvvSt) XexOevTOJV. ovGTjs yap Ta(f)rjs ttjs pi^ev 
VTrep^e^Xrjpbevrjs, ttjs Se eXXeiTTOVGTjs , ttjs Se p,eTpias, ttjv 5 
fjLiav eXopievos cw, rrjv pieGTjv, ravrrjv TrpoGTarreis Kai errrj- 
veGas aTrXcJS' eyoj 8c, el p.ev yvvq puoL 8La(f)epovGa eh] ttXovto) 
Kal OdiTTeiv avTTjv Sta/ceAeJotro ev rep iroLijpLaTL, tov virep^aX- 
XovTa dv rd(f)ov erraivoi-qv y ^etScuAos" S* av ris Kal Trevrjs dvrjp e 
TOV KaraSedy puerpov Be ovGtas KeKrrjpievos Kal puerpios avTos 
cov TOV avTov dv eTraiveGai. goI Be ovx ovtco prjTeov chs vvv 
eLires pLeTptov etTTcui/, aAAa rt to pueTptov Kal ottogov prjTeov, 
T] TOV TOLOVTOV Xoyov pL'^TTOj GOI Biovoov yiyveGdai vopuov.' 5 

KA. AXrjdeGTaTa Xeyeus. 

A0 . IloTepov ovv rjpLLv 6 TeTaypuevos errl tols vopLots pLr^Bev 
TOLOVTOV TTpoayopevT) ev dpxfj tcov vopaoVy dAA* evdvs o Set 
TTOtelv /cat piT] (fypd^rj re, Kal eTTaTreiXrjGas ttjv ^rjpLLav, eir* 
dXXov Tpe7Tif]Tai vopuoVy irapapivOias Be Kal TreuOovs tols J20 

133 



nAATi2N02 
vofio9€TOVfJLevoL£ /xTySc €V rrpoGSiSa) ; KadaTrep larpos Se rcSy 

O jX€V OVTWS, 6 8 €K€LVOJS y]P'OL£ €LO)d€V eKOLGTOTe d€pa7T€V€LV 

avafjLLfjLVT^CTKcofjLeda Se rov rpoirov eKarepov, Iva rod vojjLoOerov 
5 oeojfjieda, Kaddnep larpov hioivro av TratSes" rov Trpaorarov 
avTov depaneveLV rpoTTOv iavrovg. otov Srj ri Xeyofiev; elalv 
TTOV TLves LarpoL, (/»a/xeV, Acat riveg VTTrjperaL rcov larpaJv, 
larpovs Se KaXovfiev StJttov Kal tovtovs. 
b KA. Hdvv fxev ovv. 

AG). 'Eai^ T€ ye iXevdepoi ojolv idv re SouAot, /car' CTrtra^tv 

Se Tiov SeGTTOTOjv Kal Oeojplav Kal /car' ipbTreiplav rrjv rexvr^v 

KTWvraL, Kara <f>VGLV Se pirj, Kaddnep ol iXevdepot avroi re 

5 fMefxaO'^KaaLV ovrcx) rovs re avrcjv SiSdaKovcn TralSag. deirj^ 

av ravra Svo yevrj raJv KaXov/jLevcuv larpcov; 

KA. HaJs" yap ov; 

A0. 'A/3* ovv Kal Gvvvo€L£ OTL, SovXa>v Kal iXevdipcjv 
C ovrojv T(x)V Kafivovrojv iv raXg TroAecrt, rov£ p,ev hoijXovs 

G^^hoV TL ol SovXoL TCL TToAAct larpeVOVGLV 7T€pLTp€)(OVT€9 Kal 

€V TOLS LarpeioLs irepipiivovres , Kal ovre rivd Xoyov eKdGTOv 
rrepL voGiqixaros eKaGrov rcJov oIk€tcov ovSelg tojv tolovtwv 

5 larpwv SlScogcv oi5S' aTToSex^rai, irpoGrd^as S' avrco rd 
So^avra i^ epLTTeipias, cos" aKpi^cbs elScLs, Kaddirep rvpavvos 
avd&Sriq, ot;^€Tat aTTOTrrjSTjGas irpos dXXov KdfMvovra olKerrjv, 
Kai paGTwvrjv ovtoj tw heGTTorrj 7rapaGKevdt,€L rcov Kapu- 

d vovtcjov rrjs eTrt/xcAetas" o Se eXevdepos ojs iirl to 7tX€lgtov 
ra tojv iXevdepojv voGTjpiaTa depaTrevet re Kal iTnGKonet, Kal 
TavTa i^eTdt^iov air* dp-)(rjs Kal Kara (f>VGLv, tw KdfivovTL 

KOLVOVjJL€VOS aVTO) T€ Kal TOLS (f)LXoL£, tt/Xtt fJL€V aVTO^ fJLavddv€L 

5 TL TTapa Tcov voGovvTcov, dfia Se /cat Ka6^ ogov olos re egtlv, 
8t8a(T/cet Tov aGdevovvTa avTov, Kal ov rrpoTepov evrera^ev 
TTplv av TTTj Gvp.7T€LGr), TOTE 8e p^ETa 7T€l6ov£ 'qpi€povp.€Vov del 
e TTapaGKevd^ojv tov KdfxvovTa, ets" ttjv vyieiav dycov diroTeXelv 
TTeipaTac; TTOTepov ovtcos tj eKelvcog larpos re twpievog 
dpLetvcov Kal yvpuvaGTrj? yvpivdl,ojv' Sixfj '^^ fJiiav diroTeXcJov 
SvvapLLV, 7} jjLovaxfj Kal Kara to ;)(etpov tolv Bvolv Kat 
5 aypicoTepov aTTepya^opuevos ; 

KA. noAy TTOV hiaijjepoVy <L ^eve, to StrrXfj. 
A0. BouAet 8rj Kal deaGcvpueda to SlttXovv tovto Kal 
aTrXovv iv rats" vopLodeGiais avTats yiyvopuevov ; 
KA. riaJS" yap ov ^ovXopiai; 

134 



NOMfiN A 720 e 

A0. 0€/3€ St) TTpos dewVy TLV* apa TTpwrov vofiov deZr av 10 
o vofJLoderr]? ; ap* ov Kara (fyvatv rrjv nepl yeveaecos o,p)(r]v 
TTpcoTTjv TToXecov 7T€pL KaraKOGfJLiJGeL Tals rd^eoiv; J21 

KA. Tt pLrjv; 

A0. 'Apxrj S' icrrl rcov yeveaeojv Trdaats TToXeciLV dp ovx 
Tj rcjv ydfiajv crupLfxeL^Lg /cat KOLvajvta; 

KA. Uojs yap ov; 5 

A0. TapiiKol Srj vo/jLOl rrpajroL KLvSwevovaiv ridep^evoL 
KoXojS dv Tideadac irpos opdoTTjra Trdajj TroAet. 

KA. YlavrdTTaaL /xev ovv. 

A0. Aeya>/xev Srj TTpwrov rov aTrXovv, I'^ot 8 dv ttco? 
Lorojs c5Se — 10 

Fap^elv Se, eVetSav erojv 7y rt? rpidKOvra, p^^XP^ ircov irivre D 
/cat TpidKOvra, el 8e puj, ^rjpLLOvadai ;^p-)7/xacrtV re /cat art/xta, 
XpripiaoL pL€V rocrois /cat roaots", rify /cat ri^ Se art/xta. 

'0 /LteV 0,77 AoV? 6CTT60 Tt? TOtOUTOS TTepl ydpLCOV, 6 §€ 

StTiAous oSe — 5 

Fa/xeti/ §€, ineiSdv ircov fj tls rpidKovra, p^^xpi tcjv irevre 
/cat rpLdKovra, hiavoiqdevra ojs eariv fj to dvdpcoTTLVov yevos 
(f)va€L Tivl p,€r€LXr]<f)€v ddavaaia^, ov /cat 7T6(f)VK€v iTTtdvpnav 
LCTX^LV Trds TTacrav' to yap yeveaOau /cAetvov /cat pbrj avcovvp,ov C 
Kelodai TereXevTTjKOTa rod tolovtov eorlv imdvpLLa. yevos 
ovv dvdpwTrojv iorlv tl ovp,(f)V€£ rov iravros XP^^^^> ^ "''^ 
reXovs avro) ovveTreraL /cat avveiperaL, tovtoj tw rpoTTCO d6a- 
varov ov, rep TratSas" rraihiov KaraXeLTTopievov , ravrov /cat ev 5 
ov dei, y€V€(T€L rrjs ddavaaia? pLereiXrjcfyevaL' tovtov hr] 
d7TOGT€p€LV eKOVTa iavTov ovheiTore oglov, e/c irpovoias ok 
diTOGTepel OS dv TralSwv /cat yvvaiKos dpueXfj. Treidopievos 
p,ev ovv Tip vopLO) dl,ijpLLOS dTTaXXdrroLTO dv, pirj TreiOopLevos Se d 
av, pLTjSe yapLOJV err] rpidKOvra yeyovcjs /cat irevre, ^rjpLLOVGda) 
pLev /car' evtavrov togco /cat togco, tva pLTj SoKrj rrjv pLOvavXiav 
OL KepSos /cat paGTd)vr]v (f>epeLV, /cat pbrj pbeTex^TO) Se npuajv 
(Lv dv ol vedjrepoL ev rfj iroXei rovs npeG^vrepovs avrcov 5 
TLpLCtJGLV eKaGTore, 

Tovtov Stj Trap' eKelvov rov vopLov d/coucravra e^eGriv 
TTepl evos eKdGTOv SiavorjOrjvaL, TTorepov avrovs SlttXovs ovrcj 
Set yiyveGdai rep pHQKei ro GpLLKporarov, Sta ro TreiOeLV re e 
a/xa Kat dneiXelv, r) ro) dTreiXelv pLovov ;(paj/>teVous" arrXovs 
yiyveGdai rois pLTjKeGLV. 

135 



21 e nAATfiN02 

ME. UpOS fxkv TOV AaKOJPLKOV rpOTTOV, <L ^iv€y TO TO, 

5 ^paxvTcpa det Trponpidv' rovrojv pirjv rojv ypapLfjudrajv et 
Tts" Kpirrjv e/xe KeXevoi yiyveadai TTorepa ^ovXoLfirjv av iv rfj 
TToAet fJLOL yeypajjifjieva redijvai, ra fxaKporep^ av iXoLfJLrjv, 
722 /cat Srj Acat Trepl Travros vopiov Kara rovro to Tra/DctSety/xa, €t 
yiyvoiTO e/cdrepa, ravrov rovr* av alpoijxiqv. ov ixtjv dAAd 
7TOV /cat KActi^ta tojS apeoKeiv Set ra vw vofioOerovfieva' 
Tovrov yap rj ttoXls '^ vvv roZs tolovtols [vo/xots"] XPV^^^^ 

5 hiavoovixivrj . 

KA. KaAcDs" y*, co MeytAAe, etTres". 

A0. To fiev ovv Trepl TToXXchv rj oXiyojv ypajxpidrayv 
TTOLijaaadaL rov Xoyov Xiav evrjdes — ra yap ot/xat jSeArtcrra, 

b dAA' ov TO, ^paxvrara ovSe rd jjltJktj Tifirjreov — rd 8' iv tols 
vvvSt] vofiOLs prjOetaiV ov SlttXci) ddrepa tojv irepcov 8id(f)opa 
fjiovov els dperrjv rrjs %petas", dAA' oirep ipp-qdrj vvvStj, to 
TOJV SiTTOJV laTpojv yivos opdoTaTa TrapeTedrj. irpos tovto 

5 hk ovheis €OLK€ hiavoiqOrjvai TTCUTTore TCjav vopLoOeTCov, cos i^ov 
Svolv ;3^/37yo-^at npos rds" vopioOeaias, Treidol /cat ^ta, /ca^' doov 
olov re 67rt tov aTreipov Traiheias o^Xov, tw eTepcp ;)^pct)vTat 

C pLovov ov ydp ttclOol KepavvvvTes ttjv pud^T^v vopiodeTOVoiVy 
dAA' d/cpdroj pLovov ttj ^ia. iycb 8\ cL /xa/cdptot, /cat TpiTov 
€TL TTepl Tovs vopLovs opcj yiyveudai Seov, ovSapLjj rd vvv 
yiyvopLevov . 

5 KA. To 7TOLOV St) Xiyeis; 

A0, 'E^ avTCL)v (Lv vvv SietXeypieda rjpiets Arard Oeov 
TLva yeyovoS' ax^^ov ydp i^ daov rrepl tcov vopLOJV rjpypieda 
XeyeiVy i^ ecodivov pLearjpL^pLa re yeyove /cat iv TavTTj rrayKdXrj 
dvaTTavXr) tlvI yeyovapuev, ovSev dAA' 7) Trepl vopbojv StaAeyo- 

d pL€voi, vopLovs Se dpTL pLOL hoKovpi€V Xiyecv dpx€(jdaL, Td 8 
epLTrpoudev rjv TrdvTa rjpLLV Trpooipaa v6pia>v. tL 8e raur 
elpTjKa; Tohe etTretv ^ovXrjdeiSj otl X6ya>v TrdvTCov /cat ogcov 

(jxxJVr) K€KOLVa)V7jK€V TTpOOipLid T€ iuTLV /Cat GX^^OV OLOV 

5 Tives dvaKLvqaeis i exovaai Tiva evTexvov €7nx€iprjaLV XPV 
aipLov TTpos TO piiXXov TTepaiveodaL, /cat hrj ttov KidapcpSiKrjs 
wSrjs XeyopL€V(x)vv6pi(DV Kal Trdarjs pLOVcrrjsTTpooLpLia davpuaGTCOS 

e iaTTovSaorpbiva TrpoKeLTac tojv Se ovtojs vopLOjv ovTOJVy ovs Srj 

TToXlTLKOVS €LVaL (f)apL€V, OvScls TTOJTTOTe OVT eiTTe Ti TTpOOtpbLOV 

ovT€ GVvdeTTjs y€v6pb€Vos i^TjveyKev els to (Jxjjs, ojs ovk ovtos 
(f)VG€i. TjpLLV 8e Tj VVV SiaTpi^T] yeyovv la, ws ipuol So/cet, 

136 



N0M12N A 722 e 

arjyiaivei (hs ovros, ot re ye 8r] SlttXol eSo^av vvvSij jjlol 5 
Xex^^vres vo^oi ovk elvac OLTrXcbs ovroj ttcos SlttXol , aAAa 

8vO fJL€V rLV€y VOfJLOS T€ KOL TTpOOLfXLOV TOV VOfJiOV O 817 TVpaV' 

VLKov eTTLTayfia aireLKauOev ipprjdrj rols eTTLraypLaaLV tol9 
Tcbv larpcJov ovs eliropiev av^Xevdepovs, tout elvaL vojjlos 7^3 
CLKparos, TO §€ TTpo Tovrov prjOev, 7T€L(jtlk6v X^x^^v vtto 

TOuSe, OVTiOS P'^.V elvaL 7T€LGTLk6v, TTpOOLpbioV p,r]V TOV TTepi 

Xoyovs hvvap.Lv e)(^eLV. Iva yap evp^evcos, Kal Sta ttjv €vpL€V€Lav 
evp^adearepoVy ttjv inLTa^LV, o S77 €Gtlv 6 vopLOSj he^rjraL d> rov 5 
vopiov 6 vopLoderiqs XeyeL rovrov xctptv elprjadai, p,0L Kar€(f)avr) 
TTas 6 Xoyos ovTog, ov TreWcov elirev 6 Xeyojv Slo Srj Kara 
ye TOV ep,6v Xoyov tovt^ avTo, irpootpLLov, aAA* ov Xoyog av b 
opdaJs TrpooayopevoLTO elvaL tov vopuov. TavT ovv elrrcoVy 
TL TO pLera tovto av p,OL ^ovX'qdeiiqv elprjadaL; Tohe, (x>s 

TOV VOp,o6eT7]V TTpo TTaVTCOV T€ Ciet TOJV VOpLOJV ^(peojv eOTLV 
pLT] apLoipOVS aVTOVS TipOOLpLLCOV TTOLeZv Kal KaO^ eKaCFTOVy fj 5 

Slolgovglv eavTchv oaov vvvStj toj Xex^^^Te SLrjveyKaTrjv. 
KA. To y' epLov OVK av aXXcos vopuoOerelv SLaKeXevoLTO 

7]pLLV TOV TOVTCOV eTTLGTl^pLOVa. 

A0. KaAcos" piev TOLvvv, a) KXeLVLa, SoKet^ pLOL to ye C 
TOcrovTOV XeyeLv, otl TTauiv ye vopLOLg eoTLv TrpooLpuLa Kal otl 
TTacrqs dp^opievov vop^odeoias XPV TrpoTLOevai TTavTos tov 
Xoyov TO TTecfyvKos TrpooipLLOV eKaoTOLs — ov yap apLLKpov to 
pbeTCL TOVTO eoTLV prjdrjGopLevov, ovS^ oXlyov ^La^epov 7) cra^cDs" 5 
r] pLT) Ga(j)(jL}s avTOL pLvrjpLoveveadaL — to pievTOL pieydXcjv Trepi 
XeyopLevcov vopLOJV Kal apLLKpojv el opLOLCxjg TTpooLpLLa^eadaL 
TTpoGTaTTOLpLev , OVK OLV opdojs XeyoLpiev. ovSe yap aupLaTog 
ov8e Xoyov navTos Set to tolovtov hpdv — /catVot TTe<j)VKev d 
ye elvaL TTaciLv, dXX ov ;\;p7^o'Teov aTTaoLv — avTcp Se tco re 
prjTopL Kal TW pLeXcpSo) Kal vopLodeTTj to tolovtov eKauTOTe 
eTTLTpeTTTeov. 

KA. AXrjdeGTaTa SoKel? piOL XeyeLV. aAAa hrj pLTjKeT* , cS 5 
^eVe, SLaTpL^Tjv TrAetco ttj^ pieXXrjoeojs TTOLwpbeda, eTrl Se tov 
Xoyov eTTaveXda>pLev Kal oltt^ eKelvcov dp^wpLeda, e'i gol (jyiXov, 
(hv ovx OJ9 TTpooLpLLa^opievos elTTes TOTe. TraAtv ovv, otov 
(paGLV OL TTait^ovTes y dp,eLv6va)v e^ dpx^j^ SevTepojv eTTavarro- e 
XriGOjpLev y ojs TTpooLpLLOv dXX ov TOV TVXpvTa Xoyov TTepai- 
vovreSy KadaTTep dpTL' Xd^ojpLev 8* avTiov dpx'rjv opLoXoyovvTes 
TTpooLpLLa^eGOaL. Kal tol pLev TTepl decov TLpLrjs TTpoyovcov re 

137 



23 e HAATfiNOS N0M12N A 

5 OeparreiaSy /cat ra vvvhrj Xex^^vra cKavd' ra S* e^^s" Treipco- 
fjLeda XiyeiVy fiexpi'TT^p ctV uot ttolv to TrpooipLLOv cKavwg 
elprjadat SoKfj, pbera Be rovro rjSrj rovs vopLovs avrovs Ste^et 
Xeycov. 
724 A0. OvKovv TTepl Oecjv fiev Kal roJv fiera Oeovg Kal 
yoviiov t^divrojv re irepi kol reXevrrjaavrcov rore LKavcog 
TTpooL/jbiaaafjieda, ws vvv Xeyopuev to Se dTToXenropLevov en 
rod roiovTOV (fyaivrj jjlol av SiaKeXeveadai rd vvv olov irpos 
5 TO <j)cx)s erravdyeiv , 

KA. YlavTaTTaGL fjuev ovv. 

A0. 'AAAo, fjirjv fjL€Td ye ra TOtavTa, cos" XPV '''^ Trepl 
Tas avTCov ifjv^ds kol ra crco/xara Kal Tas ovuias (JttovStjs 
b re TTepi Kal dveaews lgx^lv, TrpooriJKov t* €(ttI Kal kolvo- 
TaTOV ava7Tepi7ral,oiJLevovs tov re XeyovTa Kai tovs aKovovTas 
Traiheias yiyveuOai /cara SvvapiLv eirrj^oXovs' raur' ovv rjfJLLV 
aura /xer' eKelva ovtojs eaTuv prjTea re Kal dKovuTea. 
5 KA. 'Op^drara Xeyeis. 



138 



BOOK V 

SHORT ANALYSIS 

726-734 e 2. — Conclusion of the General Prelude, the first 
part of which came at 715 e 7-718 a 6 : " Honour the soul in the 
right way, and cherish the right kind of human characteristics." 

7346 3-747 e ^^- — Regulations (1) As to selection of members 
of the community, and the rejection of undesirable citizens. (2) 
As to Numbers of Households. (3) As to Arrangement and 
Division of Landed Property. (4) Limitations as to the nature 
and the acquisition of Property. 

E 

A0. 'A/CO Jot Srj Trds oairep vvvStj to, irepi deojv re rjKOve ^26 
Kal Tcbv <I>lXojv TTpoTTaropcov TTOLVTCOv yap T<JL)V avTOV KrrjpLarojv 
[fjLeTa6€OV£]iljvx'^G€L6TaTOV,olK€L6TaTOv6v. raS avrovSiTra 
iravT iarl Trdaiv. ra fxev ovv Kpeirrcj Koi d/xctVcD SeaTTo^ovra, 
TO, Se rp-TOj Kal X^^P^ SovXa' rcov ovv avrov ra SeaTTo^ovra ^ 
del TTpoTLfirjreov rcov SovXevovrcov . ovtoj Sr) rrjv avrov ijivx^jv, 
fjuerd deovs ovras Seanorag Kal rovg rovrocs eTTopiivovs y rtpidv 727 
Setv Xeyojv hevrepav, opddJs TTapaKeXevopuaL. rt/xa 8 cos" cttos" 
elireiv rjfjLcov ovSels opdcbs, SoAcet Se* OeZov yap ayaOov ttov 
ripLT), rd>v Se KaKcov ovSev rlpLLov, 6 8 rjyovpLevos rj nai 
Xoyois rj hojpoLS avrrjv av^eLV rj rioiv vireL^eaiV, pnqhev ^ 
^eXricx) hk e/c ;;^et/30j/os" avrrjv diTepyal^opievos , rt/xdv piev 
hoKeZ, Spa Se rovro ovSapicos. avriKa rraZs evdvs yevo' 
pL€vos dvdpcoTTog irds rfyelr at iravra lkovos elvai yLyva)crK€LVy 
Kal ripidv oterac inaLvajv rrjv avrov ipvx'riv, Kal TrpodvpuovpLevos 5 
ivLrpeTTeL Trpdrretv on dv edeXj), ro 8e vvv Xeyopuevov eariv 
(hs Spcov ravra ^Xdirrei Acat ov rt/xa* Set Se, ojs (f)apL€v, 
p^erd ye Oeovs Sevrepav, ovSe ye drav dvOpojTTOs rcov avrov 

139 



727 b nAATi2N02 

5 €KaGroT€ afiaprrj^jbdrcov firj iavrov alriov rjyrjraL kol rcbv 
TrXeLGTCov KaKwv Kal ixeyiarajv, dAAa aXXovs, iavrov 8e det 
avairLOV i^aipfj, TLfjucov rr)v avrov ipvxrjV, a>s" Si) SoAcet — o Se 

C TToXKov Set hpdv TOVTO' ^XoLTTTet yap. ouS' oTTorav rjSovaXs 
TTapa Xoyov rov rod vopboderov Kal eiraivov )(apL^rjraL — rore 
ovSa/jLoJ? TLfjia, OLTLfjid^eL Se KaKcov Kal (jLerafieXela? IpLTTipbTrXas 
avrijv. ovSe ye oirorav av rdvavria rovs iiTaivovfJiivovg 

5 7TOVOVS Kal (f)6fiovs Kal dXyrjSova^ Kal Xviras pir} hiarrovfj 
Kaprepcov aAAa VTreLKrj — rore ov rt/xa VTreLKcov dnpLOV yap 
avTTjv arrepydt^erai Spajv rd roiavra orvpLTravra. owS' oTTorav 

d rjyijrai to ^rjv TrdvTio? dyaOov etvai, rt/xa, drLpid^eL 8' avrrjv 
Kai t6t€' rd ydp iv "AiSov irpdypiara Trdvra KaKd r^yovpievrjs 
TYJs ^v)(rjs elvai, vireiKei Kal ovk dvrtretVet SiSdaKcop re Kal 
eXey)(a)v ojs ovk otSev ov8^ el rdvavria rre<j)VKev pueyiara 

5 elvai Trdvrojv dyaOchv rjpuv rd irepl rovs 6eov9 rovg eKel. 
ovSe pLTjv TTpd dperrjs onorav av TTponpia ng KdXXog — rovr* 
eonv ovx erepov t) rj rrjs ^^XV^ 6vrcx)s Kal Trdvrcjs dripiia. 
4'^XV^ y^P crco/xa evnpLorepov ovros 6 Aoyos" cfyrjalv elvai 

e ipevSopievos' ovSev ydp yrjyeveg 'OXvp^TTLCov evripLorepov, dXX 
o TTepc ^vxt]s dXXojs ho^dt,a)v dyvoeZ (hs davpuaarov rovrov 
KTijpLaros dpLeXel. ovSe ye oirorav ;\;/)7y/xaTd ris ipa Kraadai 
728 P''^ KaXwSy 7) pLT] SvGxepcos 4^^PT} K't^^P-^vos, Scupots" dpa rt/xa 
Tore rrjv avrov ijjvx'^v — rravrdg piev ovv XeiireL — rd ydp 
avrrjg npnov dpua Kal KaXdv dTTohihorai apuKpov ;\;/3i;croL>- 
TTas yap 6 r eTrl yrjs Kal vtto yrjg XP^^^^ dperrjs ovk 

5 avra^tog. cog Be etTrelv cruXXrj^hr^v , 09 dwep dv vopuoderrjs 
aiGXpd elvai Kal KaKd hiapidpiovpLevos rdrrrj Kal rovvavriov 
ayada /cat /caAct, rcov pLev dTTex^aOai purj eOeXrj Trdar] purjxoi'^fj , 
rd 8e eTnrrjSevetv avpLTraaav Kard Bvvapnv, ovk otSev iv 

b rovroLS TrddLv Trds dvdpcoTTOs ipvx'^v Beiorarov ov aripuorara 
/cat KaKOGX^jP'Oviarara hiandeis. rrjv ydp Xeyopbivqv Blkyjv 
rrjs KaKovpyias rrjv pLeylarrjv ovSels cog erros elirelv Xoyl^eraL, 
earcv 8 rj pbeyiarr^ rd opLoiovadai rots ovaiv KaKotg avSpdatv, 

5 opLOiovpievov 8e rovg pLev dyadovs (f)evyet,v dvSpas Kal Xoyovg 
Kal aTTOGxiC^crOaL, roXs Se TrpoGKoXXdadai SicoKovra Kard rdg 
GVvovGias' 7rpoG7Te(f)VK6ra 8e rots' roiovroig avayKrj TTOielv 

C /cat TTaGX'^t'V d TrecfyvKaGiv dXXtjXovs ol roiovroL TTOieiv Kal 
Xeyeiv. rovro ovv 8rj rd Trddos Slkt) puev ovk eGnv — KaXov 
yap ro ye 8t/catov /cat ■^ 8t/c7^ — npLCDpia 8e, dSt/ctas* aKoXovdos 

140 



N0M12N E 728 c 

Trddr], rjg 6 re rv)((JiJV kol fxrj ruyp^avcoi/ ddXcog, o fxev ovk 
larpevofMevos, 6 8e, tva erepoL ttoXXoI aw^covTai, oLTToXXv/jLevos. 5 
TLfirj 8' iarlv rjfjLTv, cu? to oXov eiTTelv, rots" fJ^ci^ apbeivouLv 
erreadai, rd Se ^(eipova, yeviadai he ^eXriw Svvara, tovt 
avTo cos dptara airoreXelv. 

^VXT]S OVV dvdpCVTTCp KTTJfJLa OVK €GTLV €V(f)V€ar€pOV €LS 

TO (fyvyelv fjuev to KaKOV, Ixvevaat 8e /cat eXeiv to TrdvTOJV d 
dpioTOV, /cat eXovTa av KOLvfj gvvolk€lv tov eTnXoLTTOV ^lov 
Sto hevTepov iTd^Qy] '''t/xf], to he TpiTOV — ttci? dv tovto ye 
vorjoetev — ttjv tov craJ/zaros' etvat /cara (fivonv Tipujv ras" 8 
av TLfxag Set GKorrelv, /cat tovtojv Tives dX-qdeZs /cat ocrat 5 
KL^hrjXoCt tovto he vofxoOeTOV. fjurivveiv hrj piOL (^atWrat 
Tdohe /cat rotaaSe TLvds auras' elvai, TLpaov elvai crcD/xa ov 
TO KaAov ovoe icr)(ypov ovoe Ta^os ^X^^ ovoe pueya, ovoe 
ye TO vyieivov — /catVot ttoXXoIs dv tovto ye hoKol — /cat pLrjv e 
ovhe Td TOVTOJV y evavTia, to, 8' ev tw pLeocp aTvdorjs TavTTjs 
TTJs e^eojs ecjiarrTopieva oaxfypoveoTaTa a/xa Te d(j(f)aXeaTaTa 
elvat pLaKpcp' Td puev ydp x^^^^^vg Tds ipvxds /cat Opaaeias 
TTOiel, Td he Taireivas Te /cat dveXevdepovs. (hs 8' avTOJs 5 
7] Tcov ;(pT7/xaTa)P' /cat KTrjpidTajv KTijat?, /cat TCpLijaeajg /caTO, 
TOV avTov pvOpLOV ex€i' Td pLev virepoyKa yap eKaaTOJV 
TOVTOJV ex^pag /cat GTaaeis aTrepydt^eTai Tat? TToXeaiv /cat 7^9 
tota, Ta o eAAeiTrovTa oovAeias ojs to ttoAv, pLrj otj rt? 
<f)LXoxpy]P'OveLTOj rraihojv y eVe/ca, tva oVt TrAouo-tajTaTou? 
KaToXLTT-iy ovTe ydp e/cetVot? ovTe av Tjj TToXet dpLeivov. rj 
ydp TCOV veojv d/coAa/ceuTOS' ovoia, tojv 8 dvayKaiojv purj 5 
evheris, avrrj Traoajv pLOVcnKWTaTr] Te /cat dpiGTiq' ox'/x^co- 
vovcra ydp rjpLlv /cat avvappLOTTOVoa ets diravTa dXvirov tov 
^Lov aTTepydi^eTac. Tracalv he atScD XPV "^oXX-qv, ov xP^^ov b 
KaTaXeiTTeiv . olopLeda he eTnTrX-qTTOVTes toZs veois dvac- 
GxvvTOVOLV TOVTO KaTaXeLipeLV TO 8 eaTLV OVK e/c roi; vvv 
TTopaKeXevpiaTos toZs veocg yiyvopLevov^ o irapaKeXevovTai 
XeyovTes d>s heZ irdvTa alaxvveadat tov veov. 6 he epLcfjpojv 5 
vop,odeTiqs ToZs Trpecr^VTepoLs dv pidXXov irapaKeXevoiTO 
alax^vecrdaL tov? veovs, Kal TrdvTUJV pidXiGTa evXa^eZadai 
pLij TTOTe TLS avTOV thrj Tojv vecov 7) /cat eTraKOvarj hpwvTa 7^ 
XeyovTa tl tojv atcrxpdjv, cos ottov dvaiaxvvTOVGL yepovTes, C 
dvdyKTj Kal veovs evTavda euvai dvacheoTaTOVs' 7rat8eta ydp 
veojv hiacfjepovod eoTLV a/xa K-at avTOJV ov to vovdeTeZv, oAA' 

141 



729 c nAATfiN02 

a7T€p av aXXov vovOeraJv €L7tol rts", ^aiveudai ravra avrov 
5 Spojvra Slol ^lov. avyy eveiav Se Acat o/jLoyvtajv decov kolvoj- 
viav Trdoav ravrov (jivaiv atfiaros exovaav TLfxcbv ns /cat 
oe^oixevos y evvovs av yevedXiovs deovs ets" TralScov avrov 
GTTopav LdxoL Kara Xoyov. /cat jjltjv to ye (fyiXcov /cat eraipojv 

d TTpOS TO.? eV ^LCp O/XtAtaS" €Vpi€V€Xs O.V TLS KTCpTO, fieU^OVS fJieV 

/cat oepivorepas ras eKeivojv V7T7]p€(JLas els avrov 'qyovfxevos 
Tj ^KeZvoiy eXdrrovs S' av ras avrov Stavoovfievos els rovs 
^iXovs ;)^a/DtTas" avrcov rcov (f)lXajv re /cat eraipcov. els P'rjv 

5 ttoXlv /cat TToXir as jJLaKpo) apLuros oans rrpo rod 'OAf/x- 
TTiaoLV /cat airdvrojv dycovcov TToXejjLLKOJv re /cat elprjVLKwv 
VLKOV Se^atr' av So^j) VTrrjpeaias rojv olkol vofiwv [d>s 

e VTTTjperrjKcbs irdvrojv KdXXcar dvdpdJTTWv avrols ev rw ^lo)]. 
TTpos S' av rovs ^evovs Scavo-qreov cos dyicjrara avfi^oXaua 
ovra' ax^^ov yap Trdvr earl rd rdJv ^evcov [/cat els rovs 
^evovs] dfJLaprrjfxara irapa rd rcov TToXtrcov els Beov dvrjprrj- 

5 fjieva rifJLCopov puaXXov. eprj/jios ydp wv 6 ^evos eralpwv re 
/cat avyyevcov eXeeivorepos dvOpdoiroLS /cat Oeols' 6 hvvd- 
fievos ovv rLpbajpelv jxdXXov ^orjdeL TrpodvpLorepov, Svvarac 
yS^ Se hia^epovrcjs 6 ^evios eKdarcjv Sat/xcov /cat Oeos rw ^evico 
avveTTouLevoi Att. ttoXXtjs ovv evXa^eias, J) /cat apuKpov 
TTpopLiqdeias evi, jJir^Sev djxdprr]p.a irepl ^evovs dfxaprovra ev 
rd) ^LO) TTpos TO reXos avrov TTopevdrjvai. ^evcKOJV S' av 

5 /cat e7TLXCJ0pLa>v dpLaprrjjjLdrcov ro Trepl rovs iKeras pbeycarov 
y iyver ai dfjidprrj/jia eKduroLS' pied ov ydp iKerevaas fJidp- 
rvpos d LKerrjs Oeov anervx^v opboXoyiajv, <j>vXa^ 8ta<^e/06t>v 
ovros rod Tradovros yiyveraiy war ovk av irore drLpLcop7]ros 
rrddoL 6 rvxd)V <Lv eirade, 

b To. piev ovv Trepl yoveas re /cat eavrov /cat rd eavrov, 
TTepl TToXiv re /cat ^iXovs Kal avyyeveiav, ^evLKd re /cat 
eTTLXcopLa, hieXiqXvdap.ev ax^^ov o/xtAT^/xara, ro he ttolos tls 
d)V avros dv KoXXiara Siaydyoi rov ^lov, eTTopievov rovrco 

5 Ste^eXOelv oaa pLT) vopioSy aAA' eTracvos rraiSevcuv Kal i/joyos 
eKdarovs eviqviovs pidXXov Kal evpcevets rots redijaeadac 
pueXXovaLV vopLots dTrepyd^erai, ravr^ earlv pierd rovro rjpiXv 

C prjreov. dXrjd eia Srj Trdvrojv puev dyadojv deoZs 'qyeZrai, 
Trdvrojv he dv6pd)TT0CS' rjs d yevqaeadai pueXXcov puaKdpLos 
re /cat evhaipLOJV e^ dpx^js evdvs pLeroxos ecr), Iva d>s TvXelarov 
Xpovov dXrjdrjs d)V 8taj8tot. TTcaros ydp' 6 he aTnaros oJ 

142 



NOMfiN E 730 c 

^iXov ipevSos EKOvaiov, orco 8e olkovglov, dvov^. Jjv ovSe- 5 
repov ^rjXajTOV. a^tAos" yap Srj ttols 6 le aTTiGrog /cat aixadrjs, 
Xpovov Se TTpo'Covros yvcoadeis, €t? to x^Xeirov yrjpas iprj/jLLav 
avTO) TTaaav KareGKevdaaro irrl reXei rod ^ioVy ware t,ajVTCjov 
Koi {jLTj iraipajv /cat rraihcxjv g^^^ov ojxolojs 6p<^av6v avro) d 
yeveaOat rov ^iov. rifxios fiev Srj /cat o fJurjSev dSiKcLv, 6 
8e fJirjS^ €7TLTp€7Ta>v TOtS" aSt/couCTtv dSt/cetv rrXeov r) StTiAacrtas' 
TLjjLTJs d^ios eKeivov 6 /mev yap ivos, 6 8e ttoXXcov avrd^tos 
iripojv, fxiqvvojv rrjv rcov dXXojv to is dp^ovacv dSt/ctav. o 8e 5 
/cat GvyKoXd^ojv els 8wa/xtv rots' dpxovaiv^ 6 fxiyas dvrjp 
€v TToXei /cat reAetos", ovtos avayopeveado) VLKr](f)opos dpeTrj. 
Tov avTOV St] tovtov enaivov /cat irepl oaxjypouvvrjs XPV ^^' ^ 
y€iv /cat TTepl (j)povrjG€a>s , /cat oaa dAAa dyadd rt? /ce/cTT^rat 
Suvard /XT^ jjlovov avTOv ex^iv dXXd /cat dAAots" /xeTa8t8ovaf 
/cat TOV fjL€V fjueTaSiSovTa ws dKpoTaTOv XP'^ rt/xav, tov 8' au 
pLTj Svvdpi€VOVy idiXovTa 8e, eai^ SevTepov, tov 8e (f)dovovvTa 5 
/cat eKOVTa fxrjSevl kolvcovov 8ta ^tAtas" ytyvopievov dyadojv 
TLVOJV avTov fjL€V ijj6y€tv, TO 8e KTTJjJLa jjLTjSev [jlclXXov 8td Toj/ 731 
KeKTTjpievov dTLfidt,€LV, dXXd KToiadaL /card hvvapuv. ^lXo- 
VLKetTO) 8e T^/xti^ Trds" Trpos" apeTJ^v a<^d6vajs. 6 pukv yap 
TOLovTog rds" TroAets" av^ec, d/JLiXXcopievos /xev auros", rous" 
d'AAous' 8e ou /coAoucov 8ta^oAats" d 8e (f)dov€p6s, ttj tcov 5 
dAAojv' Sia^oXfj 8etv olofiGVOs vnepex^t'^t avTos re tjttov 
avvTetveL irpog dpcTrjv ttjv dXiqdrjy tovs re dvdapuXXojpiivovs 
els ddvpLiav KadLGTrjcn tw dSiKOJs i/jeyeadaL, /cat 8td TavTa 
dyvjxvaGTOV ttjv ttoXlv oXtjv els dpLiXXav dpeTrjs ttolcov, b 
apiiKpoTepav avrrjv irpos evho^iav to eavTOV piepos drrepyd- 
^erat. dvpLoeiSrj puev Srj XP'^ ndvTa dvSpa etvat, rrpaov Se 
ws OTL /xdAtcrra. rd yap tcov dXXwv ;\;aAe7Td /cat SvacaTa 
rj /cat TO TTapdnav dviaTa dScKijpLaTa ovk eoTw dAAojs" eK- r 
<f)vyeZv 7) puaxopievov /cat apLvvopuevov viKOJVTa /cat rdj pnqSev 
dvievai /coAd^oyra, tovto 8e di^eu OvpLOV yevvaiov ^vx^ rrdaa 
dSvvaTos Spdv. Ta 8 au rdii^ daot d8t/coi;crtv piev, lard q 
8e, ytyvcocr/cetv XPV '^pd)TOV puev otl irds 6 dSuKos ovx eKcbv 
dScKOS' Tcov yap pLeyluTcov KaKOJv ovSels ovSapiov ovSev 

eKd)V KeKTTJTO dv TTOTe, TToXv 8e TJKLGTa eV ToXs TOJV eavTOV 

TipLLOJTdTOLS' ^^XV ^> ^^ etTTO/xev, dX7]6eia ye eaTiv Trdcnv ^ 
TipLLcxjraTOv ev ovv tw rt/xtajraraj to /xeytcrrov KaKov ovSels 
eKojv pLT^ TTore Xd^r] /cat ^fj 8td jSt'oi; KeKTTjpievos avTO. dXXd 

143 



31 C nAATfiN02 

iXe€iv6s ^tev Travrojs o ye aSt/cos" Kal 6 ra KaKO, e^^v, iXeelv 

d Se Tov fjikv tacrt/xa e^ovra iyxojpel Kal aveipyovra tov dvfiov 
irpavveiv Kal ixtj aKpa)(o\ovvTa yvvaiKeicjs TTiKpaivofJievov 
^lareXeZv, rep 8' aKpdrcos Kal aTrapapivdijroJs TrX-qpupieXeZ Kal 
KaKcp i<j)ievaL Set rrjv opyrjv Sto Srj dvpLoeiSrj TTpeTreiv Kal 

5 TTpaov (fyapuev eKaarore etvai SeXv tov dyadov. 

UdvTOJV Se p^iyLGTOV KaKcbv dvOpojiroLs rols TroAAots" €/x- 
<j>VTOV iv rats' ipv)(als eanv, ov Tvds avra> avyyvcopLTjv e^^v 

e d7TO(f)vyrjv ovSep^uav pi7]-)(avdraL' rovro 8' eanv o XeyovGLV 
ws cf)LXos avTcp irds dvdpojTTOs ^ucret re eariv Kal opdojs 
€;^€t TO SeXv €ivaL tolovtov. to Se dXrjdeLa ye Trdvrajv 
dpLaprrjp^drajv Std rrjv a^ohpa iavrov <f)LXiav alnov eKdarcp 

5 yiyveraL eKdarore. ru^Aourat yap irepl to (fnXovp-evov 6 
^iXojVy cocrre Ta StVata Kal ra ayada Kai ra KaXd KaKcos 
732 Kpiv€L, TO avTov TTpo TOV dXiqdovs del Tipidv helv rjyovpievos' 
ovTe yap eavTov ovTe ra eavTov XPV "^^^ 7^ pieyav dvSpa 
eaopuevov OTepyeiVy dXXd Ta St/cata, edv re Trap* avTco edv re 
Trap* dXXcp pidXXov TrpaTTopueva Tvyxdvj]. e/c TavTov Se 

5 dpLapTrjp.aTOs tovtov Kal to ttjv dpLaSiav Trjv Trap* avTcp 
hoKelv GO(f)Lav etvai yeyove irdGLV odev ovk elSoTes ws eiros 
elirelv ovhev, olopLeBa ra irdvTa elSevaCy ovk eTnTpeirovTes 8e 

b aAAots" a pir^ e7TiGTdp,eda irpaTTeiv, avayKat^opueda dpbapTdveLV 
avTol TTpdTTOvTes. Sto TrdvTa dvdpa>7Tov XPV 4^^'^'y^^v 'T'o 
G(/)68pa (fyiXelv avTOV, tov S eavTOV ^eArto) SicoKeiv det, 
pirjSepLLav alGxvvrjV eirl tw tolovtco TrpoGdev TTOiovpLevov. 

5 '^A he GpLiKpoTepa piev tovtojv Kal Xeyopueva TroAAa/cts' ecrrtV, 
XP'Tjfy^p^o. he TOVTWv ovx TjTTOVy XPV Xeyeiv eavTov dvapLLpLvrj- 
GKovTa. (x>G7Tep ydp tlvos diroppeovTOs del Set TOvvavTtov 
eTTippeZv ' dvdpLvrjGLs 8' IgtIv eTTcpporj (j^povrjGeojs diroXei- 

C TTOVGTjg' 8to Srj yeXcjTCJV re elpyeGdai XPV '^^^ e^atGLCov 
Kal SaKpvcov, rrapayyeXXecv he TravTl TvdvT* dvhpa, Kal oXrjv 
7r€pt;j^a/3€tav irdGav diroKpvTTTopievov /cat Trepiojhvviav evGX'^)- 
pLOveXv TTeipdGOat, Acara re evirpayias cGTapuevov tov haipLOVos 

5 eKdGTOV, Kal /<ara rir)^as" otov TTpos vi/jrjXd Kal dvdvTT] 8at- 
pLOVoiv dvOiGTapuevcov tlgIv Trpd^eGiv, eXTrit^eLV 8' det rot? 
ye dyadoLGi tov deov a hojpeiTai ttovcov puev eTTiTTLVTOVTCov 

d dvrt pLeii^ovajv eXdTTOVs TTOnfiGew tcov t av vvv TrapovTOJV 
eVt TO peXTLOV pueTa^oXds, nepl he Ta dyadd Ta evavTia 
TOVTCxJV del irdvT avToZs TrapayevqGeGdac /xer' dya6rjs rvx'^S' 

' 144 



NOMftN E 732 d 

ravrais Srj ratg eXniuiv eKaarov XPV ^V^ '^^^ tols VTrofjuvq- 
creo-t TTavrcxJV rcov tolovtcou, fJLrjSev (f)€LS6fi€vov, aAA act /caret 5 
re TratStas" /cat crTTOvSa^ dvafMLfivrjaKovra erepov re /cat iavrov 
(Ta<f)6js. 

Nw ouv St) Trepl fxev iTnrrjSevfjLdrcov , ota ^P"^ iTnrrjSeveLV, 
/cat Trept avrov eKdarov, rrolov riva XP^<^^ elvai, AeAe/crat e 
cr^^^eSoy oaa ^€ta ion, rd 8e dvOpdjiriva vvv rjfitv ovk 
ctprjTac, Set Se* dvOpojiroLs ydp StaAeyo/xe^a dAA ou deols. 
€<JTLV St] ^ucret dvS pcoTreiov ^aAtcrra T^Sovat /cat XviraL /cat 
eTTidvpiiai, i^ (Lv dvdyKTj ro dvrjTOV irdv ^ajov drex^ajs otov 5 
i^r^prrjadai re /cat eKKpefjid/jLevov elvat crTTouSats' rats* /xeyt- 
crrats" Set 817 tov /caAAtcrroi^ /Stoi^ cTratvetv, /X7y fxovov on ra> 
ox'tJP'Oltl Kparet 77/009 evSo^tav, dXXd /cat ca?, ap* rts" ideXrj 733 
yeveodai /cat /at^ veos" oJv ^vyds dir* avrov yevqrat,, Kparel 
/cat TOVTCp o Trdvres l^rjrovp^ev, rep ;)^at/oet^' ttXelco, iXdrrw 
Se XvireZodai Trapd rov ^iov dnavra. cos Se earat rovro 
cra<^es', av yevrfrai ns opdojs, erot/xcus' /cat a<f)6Spa cf)avT^- 5 
crerat. 7^ Se opdorrjs ris ; rovro rj8r) Trapd rod Xoyov XPV 
XafjL^dvovra OKOTretv etre ovrcos rjpuv Kara (f>va(,v 7T€(f)VK€V 
etre aAAo)? rrapd (jivoLV, ^iov XPV '^^t./oa j8tov i^Sto) /cat 
XvTTTjporepov cSSe cr/co7retv. rjhovrjv ^ovXopieBa rjp,Zv etvat, 
XvTTTjv Se ou^* alpovpieda ovre ^ovXopieda, rd Se pur^Serepov b 
dvTt /xev T^Sov^S" 01) ^ovXofjLeda, Xvttt^s Se dAAdrrecr^at 
^ovXofxeda- Xvtttjv S' iXdrrcx) puerd pieit,ovos rjSovrjs ^ovXo- 
pieda, rjSovTjV S' iXdrro) pierd p.€il,ovos Xvtttjs ov ^ovXopieda, 
laa Se dvrt tcrcov eKdrepa rovrojv ovx OJS ^ovXopueda exoipiev 5 
dv SiaoacfyeXv. ravra Se iravra iorrlv ttXtJOcl /cat pieyidei 
/cat o(J)oSp6rrjOLV loorrjoiv re, /cat ocra ivavria iorlv TrdoL 
rois roiovrois rrpds ^ovXtjolv, Siacfyepovrd re /cat pL'qSev 
hiacfyepovra irpos atpeoLV eKaorajv. ovroj Srj rovrcov i^ C 
dvdyK-qs Sta/ce/cocr/XT^jLteVcov, ev a> /xev j9ta> evean TToXXd e/cd- 
repa /cat pueydXa kol ocfyoSpd, virep^aXXei Se rd rcDp' rihovdjv, 
^ovXopLeda, €v Jj Se rd evavria, ov ^ovXopieda- /cat av iv 
u) oXtya e/cdre/oa /cat opuiKpd /cat rjpepLata, vvep^dXXei Se rd 5 
XvTTTjpd, ov ^ovXopieda, iv a> Se rdvavrta, ^ovXopueOa. iv 
CO S av jSto) loopporrei, Kadajrep iv rot? irpoodev Set Sta- 
voeiodai' rov looppoirov ^iov ws rcov puev VTrep^dXXoyfxoL 
rep (j)iXcp rjpLLV ^ovXopieda, rcov S' av rols ix^poLS ov ^ovXo- d 
pieda. Trdvras drj Set Stavoetcr^at rous" ^iovs rjpiwv ojs iv 

VOL. I 145 L 



733 d nAATftN02 

rovrocg cvSeSc/xeVot 7T€<hvKaaiv, /cat Set 8iaipcTo6ai ttolovs 
tf)vcr€L ^ovXojjLeda' et 8e rt Trapa ravra apa ^a/xev ^ou- 
5 Xeadat, 8ta rtva ayvotav /cat a7T€ipiav tcjv ovtcov ^lcov avra 
Xeyofjiev, 

TtWs" S")) /cat TTocjoi elal ^tot, cSv Trept Set rrpoeXofxevov 
TO BovXrjTov re /cat [e/couatov d^ovXrjrov re /cat] OLKOvcnov 
e tSdi^ra ets" voiiov iavrw Ta^dpLevov, to <l>iXov dp,a /cat t^Su 
/cat dpiGTov re /cat /caAAtcrrov eXopcevov, t/qv ws otov r' iuTiv 
avdpcoTTOiv yLta/captcorara; Xdycopiev hrj (ja)(f)pova ^iov eVa etvat 
/cat ^povLpLov eVa /cat eVa rov dvSpetov, /cat rov vyLctvov 
5 jStov eVa Ta^copLeda' /cat Tourots" ovglv reVrapo-tv ivavTiovs 
dXXovs T€TTapas, dcfypova, SetAov, a/coAaCTroi^, voowSr]. ocj- 
(f)pova pL€V ovv ^iov 6 yLyvcooKOjv Oijoet Trpaov iirl rravTa, 
734 '^^^ rjpepiaLas puev XvTras, r^pepiaias Se i^Soms", ^aAa/ca? Se 
eiTidvpiias /cat epcoTas ovk ipLpLaveis Trapexdpievov, aKoXaoTOV 
e, ocfuv e77t TTavTa, /cat ocpoopas piev AvTras, ocpoopas oe 
T^Soms", (JvvTovovs Se /cat otarpcuSets' iTndvpLias [re] /cat 
5 €pa>Tas COS" otdv re ipLpLaveoTaTOVs irap^xop'^vov, vrrep^aXXov- m 
eras' Se ev /xev to) crco^povt ^toj ras" 'J^Soms" rcDv dxOrjSovcov , ev I 
Se TO) a/coAaCTTO) ra? Xviras tojv tjSovcov /xeye^et /cat TrXrjdei ■ 
/cat TrvKvorrjGLV. odev 6 puev rjSlojv rjpLtv tcov ^ia>v, 6 Se 
b XvTTTipoTepos i$ dvdyK7]s cru/x^atVet /cara ^voiv yiyv€adaL, 
/cat rov ye ^ovXopievov rjSeco9 ^t^v ovk€tl Trapet/cet e/cdi^ra 
ye aKoXdoTOJS t,rjv, dXX rjSr] St]Xov cos, et rd vw Xeyopuevov 
opdov, TTOLS i^ dvdyKTjs aKOJv ecrrtv d/cdAacrros" '^ ydp St' 
5 apuadlav t^ St' d/cpdretaj/ r) St' dpLcjyoTepa, tov aixjcjypoveZv iv- 
Serjs d)P i^fj 6 TTas dvdpcoTnvos oxXos. raurd Se Trept vood)- 
hovs re /cat vyteivov ^iov StavoT^reov, a»s exovoL ptev rjSovds 
/cat AuTras", VTrep^aXXovai Se lySovat /xei^ AwTras" iu uyteta, 
C AuTrat Se rjSovds iv voaois. rjpLLV Se rj ^ovXtjols ttjs atpe- 
crecus" Tcov /Stcov ow;^ tva rd XvTrrjpov VTrep^dXXr). ottov S' 
VTTep^dXXerai, tovtov tov ^iov 7ySta> K€KpLKapi€v. 6 St] 
adj(f)po}v TOV dKoXdoTOV /cat d ^p6vi.pLOS tov d<f>povos, <j>aipLev 
5 av, /cat d tt^s dvSpeias tov ttjs SetAta? iXdTTOva /cat apuKpo- 
repa /cat /xavdrepa e;^ct>l^' dpicf)6T€pa, ttj tcjv tjSovojv CKdTepos 
€KaT€pov VTrep^dXXojv, ttj ttjs Xvtttjs e/cetVcuv VTrep^aXXovTOJV 
d avToi;?, d /xei^ di^Spetos" rdv SetAdv, d Se ^povLpLOS tov d(f)pova 
viK(x)<jLV, a)GT€ Tjhiovs €ivaL Tovs ^Lovs TOJV ^LOJV, Gd)(f>pova 
/cat di^Spetov /cat <j>p6vipLov /cat ^ytetvdv SetAoi? /cat d(j)povos 

146 



N0M12N E 734 d 

/cat OLKoXdcrrov /cat voGcLSovg, /cat ovXXij^Srjv rov aperrjs 
i^^o^evov Kara crcD/xa r) /cat Kara ijivx^v rod rrjs fioxdrjpias 5 
i'xpfjLevov ^iov rjSia) re etvat /cat TOt? aAAot? VTT€p€')(eLV e/c 
TTepirrov /cctAAtt /cat opdorrjri /cat dperfj /cat evSo^la, ojorre 
rov exovra avrov t,rjv evSatfjLovearepov dTrepyd^ecrdaL rod e 
ivavriov ra> Travrl /cat oAa». 

Kat TO /Ltev TTpooipLLOv rGiv voficuv ivravOol XexOev rojv 
Xoyojv reAos" ix^'T(^» /xera Se to irpooipLiov avayKaZov ttov 
vojxov €7T€adaL, fidXXov Se ro y€ dXrjOes vofJLOVs TToXireias 5 
V7roypd(f)€iv. Kaddirep ovv §17 Tti'a avvv(f)rjv rj /cat TrAey/x-' 
aAA' OTtow, oi)/c €/c rd>v avrcov otov r* earlv rr^v re i<l)V(f>r]v 
/cat rov Grrjixova dTrepyd^eudai, 8ta^epetv 8 avay/catov ro 
rcov GrrjiJLovijov irpos dperrjv yevos — laxvpov re yap /cat Ttva 
^e^aLoriqra iv roZs rpoTTOLs eLXr](j>6g, ro Se fiaXaKwrepov /cat 735 
eTTLeiKeia nvl St/cata ;^/[)6tj/xevov — o^ei^ 817 tovs Tas" apxoLS ev 
ral's TToXeaiv dp^ovrag SeX Sta/cptVea^at Ttva rpoirov ravrrj 
/cat rovg cr/jLLKpa TTaiheia ^aaaviadevras eKaarore Kara Xoyov, 
earov yap Srj 8vo TToXireias eiSr], ro fxev dpx^Jov Karaurdcreis 5 
eKdaroLs, ro he vofjuoi rdls dpxoA,s dirohodevres. 

To 8e irpo rovrcjv dirdvrcxjv 8et 8tai/oeto"^at rd roidSe. 
TTaaav dyeXrjv TTOifJur^v /cat ^ovkoXos rpo<^evs re lttttojv /cat b 
oVa d'AAa roiavra TrapaXa^cjv , ovk dXXcos pufj irore eTTLxetpTJcrei 
OepaireveLV 7) irpcjrov puev rov eKdarrj TrpoarjKOvra Kadapfiov 
Kadapex rfj GvvoLKTjcrec, StaAe^a? 8e Tct re vycij /cat to. firj /cat 
rd yevvata /cat dyevvrj, rd fxev ciTroTre/xi/fct rrpos dXXas nvdg 5 
ayeAas", Ta Se depairevueiy Scavoovfievos cos p^draios dv 6 
TTovos etrj /cat dvrjvvros Tvepi re ucjfxa /cat ipvxds, as <l>vcns 
/cat TTOVTjpd rpo(l)r) hie^dapKvZa rrpoaaTToXXvuiv rd rojv vyccov q 
/cat dKTjpdrcov rjOwv re /cat aajfidrcov yevos ev eKdaroLS rcov 
KrrjfjLdrcxJVy dv rLS rd VTrdpxovra {jltj BiaKadaLprjrac. rd jxev 
Srj rcov dXXcov ^cocov eXdrrcov re gttovB'^ /cat Trapaheiy pharos 
eveKa {jlovov d^ia Trapadeadai rep Xoycp, rd Se rcov dvdpcorrcov ^ 
GTTovhrjs rrjs pLeyiarrjs rep re vop^oOerrj ScepevvaGdat, /cat (f)pd- 
t,eiv rd TTpoGrJKov eKaGrois Kadapp,ov re rrept /cat GvpuTraGcov 
rcov dXXcov npa^ecov. avriKa ydp ro Trepl KaOappiovs TToXecos d 
a>8 exov dv eirj' ttoXXcov ovgcov rcov hiaKaddpGecov at puev 
pciovs ecGLVy at 8e x^^XeTrcorepaty /cat rds p^ev rvpavvos p,ev cov 
Kat vopLoderr]s 6 avros, ocrat p^aAcTrat t' eLGLV /cat dpiGrat, 
SwatT* dv KadrjpaL, vopioOenqs Se dvev rvpawlBos KaOiGrds c 

147 



35 d nAATONOS 

TroXireiav Kacvrjv kol vofjiovs, et /cat rov Trpaorarov tcjv 
KadapjjLOJV KadijpeieVy dyaTTWvrojs av /cat to tolovtov Spd- 
a€i€V. ecrrt 8' o puev dpiGTos dXyeivos, KaSdirep oaa rcov 

e ^ap/jLaKCov TOLovTorpoTTa, 6 rfj Slkt) p^erd rt/xajptas" els ro 
KoXd^€LV dycov, Odvarov r^ (f)vyr}v rfj TipLajpia ro reXos 
eTTindeis' rovs yap p^eycara i^rjp,aprr]K6ra£, dvidrovs Se 
ovrasy p,€yL(jrrjv Se ovaav ^Xd^rjv TToXeojg, diraXXdrreiv 

5 eicoOev. 6 Se rrpaorepos iarn rcov KaOappucov 6 rotoaSe 'qpuv 
OGOL Sta r'qv rrjs rpo<f)rjg diropiav roZs rjyepiOGLV €7tl rd 
rcov e^ovrcov pnq e^ovres iroipiovs avrovs ivBeLKVVvraL irape- 
736 (JK€vaKor€s €7T€G6ai, rovroig ws voarjpLarL rroXecDS ipLTrecfyv- 
Kon, St ev(f)r]p,Las diraXXayijvy ovopua diroLKiav ridepLevos, 
€vpL€Vchs on pdXuara e^eTTepuparo . TTOvrl pikv ovv vopiode- 
rovvn rovro dpicog ye ttco? /car' dp^ds Spaareov, rjpLLV pbrjv 

5 €Tt rovrcov dyiOTTCorepa rd Trepl ravr earl crvpL^e^rjKora vvv 
ovre yap arroiKLav ovr^ eKXoyqv rtva KaOdpaecos Set pur)- 
')(avdodai Trpos ro Trapov, olov Se rivcov avppeovrcov [e/c] 

b TToXXcbv rd piev Trrjycbv rd Se xeipuappcov els piLOLV XLpLvrjv, 
avayKaXov Trpoaexovras rdv vovv (jyvXdrreiv ottcos ort 
KaOapcorarov earat rd ovppeov vScop, rd piev e^avrXovvras, 
ra 8 aTTox^revovras /cat Traparpeirovras . ttovos S', ws 

5 eoLKeVy /cat klvSvvos eartv^ ev Trdcrr] KaraaKevfj TToXinKfj. 
ra S eTTeiTrep Xoyco y* earlv rd vvv aAA' ovk epycp rrparropLeva, 
TTeTTepavdoj re rjpLiv r) avXXoyrj /cat Kard vovv rj Kadaporrjs 
avrrjs earco uvpL^e^rjKvXa' rovs ydp KaKovs tcov e7nx€L- 

C povvrcov ecs rrjv vvv ttoXlv cos TToXirevaopievovs Gwievat 
TTeidoZ TrdoTj /cat t/cava> XP^^V Sia^aaavlo-avreSy SiaKCoXv- 
acjpiev d<j)iKvelodaiy rovs S* dyadovs €ls SvvapiLV evpievels 
iXecp re Trpoaay copied a. 

5 ToSe Se /xt) Xavdaverco yiyvopievov rjpids evrvx'^P'O,, on 
Kaddirep eXiTopiev rrjv rcov * Hpa/cAetScuv drroLKLav evrvx^^v, 
cos yrjs /cat xP^dov dTTOKOTrrjs /cat vopirjs Trepc Seivrjv /cat 
eTTLKivSvvov epiv e^e(f>vyev, rjv vopboOereladaL dvayKaaOeicrrj 

d 77oAet rcov apxaicov ovre edv olov re dKtvrjrov ovr av KiveZv 
hvvarov eori nva rporrov, evx^j Se piovov cos enos elTreiv Xei- 
TTerai, /cat apuKpd pierd^aais evXa^rjs ev ttoXXw xP^^^ 
apiLKpov piera^L^di^ovGLV , y^Se • rcov KLVOVvrcov del KeKrrjpievcov 

5 piev avrcov yrjv d<j)6ovov V7Tdpx^t,v, KeKrrjpievcov Se /cat o0et- 
Xeras avroZs ttoXXovs eOeXovrcov re rovrcov tttj rois diropov- 

148 



N0M12N E 736 e 

jjiivoLs hi €7n€LK€Lav KOLVojveZv, TOL jjuev d(f)L€VTas, TO, Se e 
vefjLOfievovSf dfifj yd tttj rrjs fjLerpiorrjTOS ixofJidvovs /cat 
ireviav riyovp^ivovs elvai fjLrj to rrjv ovaiav iXdrroj TTOielv 
aXXd TO TTjv dTrXrjGTLav TrXeuoj. oojTrjpias t€ yap dpx^ 
Ix^yioTT) TToXecjs avTrj yuyveTai, Kal iirl TavTT^s olov KprjTrlSos 5 

flOVLflOV €7TOLKobojJL€LV SvvaTOV OVTLVa dv VGTepOV iTTOLKoSo/JLT] 

TL9 KOGfjLOV ttoXltlkov TTpoGTjKOVTa Tjj ToiavTTj KaTaGTauev 
TaiJTTjs §€ aadpds ovarjs [ttjs" fxeTa^doecos], ovk evnopos rj 737 
/Ltera raOra ttoXltlkti irpd^LS ouScfxiqt yiyvoiT^ dv TToXei. 
rjv rjjjLeis /^eV, u)S (f)afi€V, €K(f)€vyofjLev' ojjlws Se elprjodai ye 
opdoTepov, el Kal {jltj €^€(f)€vyop,€v, 07717 '^ot^ ^^ iTTOLOVfxeda 
avTrjs TTjv <j>vyriv. elprjodoj hrj vvv otl hid tov (jlt} cf)iXo- 5 
XP'r]P'0,T€LV fieTd St/CT^s", (xAAt^ S* ovk eoTiv ovT* evpeZa ovt€ 
GTevrj TTJs TOiavTTjs iJiri-)(avy]s hiat^vyrj' Kal tovto jjlev olov 
epfxa TToXecos rjfjLLV KeiGdco ra vvv. dveyKXi^TOVs yap Set b 
ras" oucrtas" Trpos aAAT^AofS" KaTaGKevdt^eodai dfjLOJs ye ttcos", 
7J fiTj TTpo'CevaL TrpoTepov ets" TOvp^Trpoodev eKovTaq etvac ttjs 
dXXrjs KaTaGKevrjs ots" fj TraAato, eyKX-qjxaTa Trpos aXXriXovs, 
[/cat] OGOLS vov Kal GpuiKpov p^eTTJ' OLS Se, cos rjpLtv vvv, 5 
Beds eSco/ce kollvt^v t€ ttoXlv olklI,€lv Kal fiij TLvas exOpas 
elval 7T(D Trpos dXXijXovs, tovtovs ex^pas avTols atrtofS" 
yeveodat 8ta ttjv hiavop^r^v ttjs yrjs re Kal oiKrjGeojv ovk 
dvdpdjTTLvos dv etrj fjueTd KdKTjs TTaGTjs dfjuadla. 

TlS OVV Srj TpOTTOS dv €L7] TTJS Opdijs S taV O {JLTJ S i TTpOJTOV C 

jLt€v TOV axiTOJV oyKov TOV dpidfjLOV Set Td^aodai, ttogov etvau 
Xpecov fieTa Se tovto ttjv Siavofirjv TOiv ttoXltojv, Ka6* drcoGa 
jLte/07y TrXr^Bei /cat OTTrjXiKa Statpereov aurou^, dvofMoXoyr^Teov 
eVt Se raura ttJv re yfjv Kal Tds OLKTJGeis otl pudXiGTa loas 5 
iTTLvepLTjTeov . oyKos hrj ttXtjOovs lkovos ovk aXXcos opdojs 
yiyvoiT* dv Xex^els rj Trpos ttjv yrjv Kal Trpos ras tcjv 
TrXrjGLOXcopcov voXeiS' Y^? /^^^ ottogt] ttogovs G(x)<f)povas d 
ovTas LKavTj Tp€<f)€LVy ttXclovos Sc ovSev TTpooheZ, TrXtjdovs 
Se, OTTOGOL Tovs TTpoGX<^povs dSiKOVVTaS T€ aVTOVS dfJLVVaGdat 
SvvaTol Kal yeiTOGLV iavTWV aSiKovpievoLS ^orjOrjoai /jltj vavTa- 
TTaoLV dTTopcos SvvaivT dv. TavTa Se, tSoi^res" ttjv x^p<^^ f<al 5 
TOVS yeiTovas, opiovpLeda kpyco Kal Xoyous' vvv Se gx'^P'O.tos 
ev€Ka Kal VTToypa<l)rjs tva TTepaLvrjTac, Trpos ttjv vopLod^Giav 

6 XoyOS LTO). 

IlevTaKLS P'€v ;(tAtot eoTcuGav Kal TeTTapaKOVTa, dpidfjuov C 

149 



37 e HAATfiNOS 

TIVOS €V€Ka TrpOdTjKOVTO^j yeCOfJLOpOL T€ /cat OLfJiVVOVVTeS rfj 

vofifj' yrj Se /cat ot/CT^crets" (hoavrojs ra avra fJieprj StavefJir)- 
6'QrojVy yevofxeva dvrjp /cat KXrjpos avvvopirj. Suo pi^ev Srj pieptj 

5 rod TTavros apidfiov to Trpwrov veixrjdrjrcx) , fiera 8e ravra rpia 
Tou avrou • 7T€(f)VK€ yap /cat rerrapa /cat Trivre /cat P'dxpi' tojv 
Se/ca ecjie^rjs. Set St^ vre/ot dpiOfJLOJV to ye roaovrov TrdvTa 
73S avSpa vofJLoOerovvTa vevorjKevat, ris dpidfjuos /cat Trotos" 
Trdaais TToXeaiv -x^piqGiixdjTaTOS dv eliq. XeyojfjLev Br) rov 
TrAe terra? /cat i(f)€^rj£ fidXiara SiavofJids iv avrco K€Krr]pL€Vov, 
6 fJL€v Srj Trds els Trdvra Trdaas ro/jids elXri^ev 6 8e rcjv 

5 rerrapaKovra /cat rrevraKiax^Xiojv els re TToXepiov /cat ocra 
/car elpijvrjv [77^0? dnavra rd avpi^oXaia /cat KOLVcovrjiiara], 
eL(j(f)opd)v re Trepi /cat Stavo/xcDi^, ov TrAetous" /xta? Seoucrcoj/ 
e^rjKovra Bvvair dv rejJLvecrdaL roficov, avvex^'is Be diro puds 

b piexpf' TOiv Se/ca. 

Taura /xev ovv Srj /cat /card axoXrjv Bel ^e^aicos Xa^elv, 
ols dv 6 vofJLOs TTpoGrdrrrj Xapu^dvecv' ep^ct ydp ovv ovk dXXcos 
7] ravrrj' Set Se avra pr^drjvac rcjvBe eveKa KaroiKit^ovn 

5 ttoXlv. ovt dv Kaivrjv e^ ^PXV^ '^^^ TTOifj ovr* dv TraXaidv 
Bie^dappLevrjV eTnoKevd^rjraL, Trepl dewv ye /cat lepwv, drra 
T€ iv rfj TToXei eKaarois IBpvoBai Set /cat (Lvtlvcjv eirovopid- 
^eadat decov tj BatpLovcov, ovSet? eiTLxeiprjaei Kivelv vovv ex^jv 

C daa e/c AeX(f)djv 7) AojBcvvtjs t) Trap* "Ajjcpbcovos rj rives eireiGav 
TTaXaLol XoyoL OTrrjBij rcvas Tretcravres, (f)aGpidrojv yevopLevcov 
T] eTTirrvoias XexOeiarjs Oecov, Treiaavres Be dvaias reXerais 
crvjjLpLeLKrovs Kareariqaavro etre avrodev eTVLXcopiovs elr* ovv 

5 TvpprjvLKds etre K^VTrpias etre dXXoBev odevovv, Kadiepcoaav 
Be roZs roiovroLS Xoyois (j)'qpLas re /cat dydXpiara /cat ^ajpuovs 
/cat vaovSy repuevrj re rovrcov eKdarois erepLeviaav rovrojv 

d vofioOerrj ro apLLKporarov dTrdvrojv ovBev Kivrjreov, roXs Be 
piepecnv eKdaroLS deov 7) Batpbova 7} /cat rtva TJpcoa diroBoreov, 
ev Be rfj rrjs yrjs Biavopufj Trpchrois e^aipera repuevT] re /cat 
Trdvra rd irpoGrjKovra drroBoreov, ottojs dv crvXXoyoi eKdorajv 

5 rojv puepdjv Kard xpovovs ycyvopLevoi rovs Trpocrraxdevras 
els re rds XP^^^^ eKaaras evp,dpeiav TrapaoKevdl^cjOGiy /cat 
(f)iXo(f)povd)vraL re d?<X'ijXovs pierd dvaiojv /cat ot/cetcDvrat 

e /cat yvcopL^CDdtv, od pbel^ov ovBev TToAet aya^ov 7) yvajptpLOVS 
avrovs avrois elvai. ottov ydp put] (jicos dAAT^Aots" eariv 
dXXijXojv iv roLS rpoirois dXXd GKoros, ovr^ dv npirjs ttJs 

150 



N0M12N E 73Se 

a^ias ovT* dp)(6jv ovre Slktj^ TTori tls av rrjg 7Tpoa7jKOVGr]g 
6pd(x)s TvyxQ-voi' Set Si] Trdvra dvSpa iv Trpos ev rovro 5 
anevSeiv iv irdcraLs TToAecrtv, ottcjs jJbrjTe auros" kl^StjXos 
TTore (f)av€LTaL otcoovv, drrXovs Sc /cat dXrjdrjs del, pufjre 
dXkos TOiovTOS (x)V avTOV StaTraTTycret. 

*H S17 TO /xera rovro <f)opd, KaOdirep Trerrcov d(j)* lepov, rrjs 739 
rojv vofJLCov KaraGK€vrjs, d-qOrjs ovaa, rd^ dv davfjudaai rov 
dKovovra ro irpwrov 7toliJg€L€v. ov firjv dAA' dvaXoyt^ofievo) 
/cat 7T€Lpa)fX€Vcp ^avelrai Sevrepojs dv ttoXls olKeiadai Trpos 
ro peXriarov. rd^OL S* ovk dv ns irpoahe^airo avrrjv Sta ro 5 
fjLTj Gvvqdes vofjLoOerr) fjirj rvpavvovvri' ro 8 ecrrtv opdorarov 
€L7T€LV fxkv Tr]V dpLGrjTjv TToXireLav /cat Sevrepav /cat rpcrrjv, 
Sowat Se eliTovra atpeoriv e/cacrroj rep rrjs avvoiKrjGeoJS Kvpicp. b 
TTOLcopLev Srj Kara rovrov rov Xoyov /cat ra vvv rj/JLeXg, elTTovres 
dperfj Trpcorrjv iroXireiav /cat hevripav /cat rpirrjv rrjv Se 
alpeGLV KAetvta re dTToBiScoiJLev ra vvv /cat €t ns dXXos det 
TTore id€XT]G€L€v CTTt rrjv rcov roiovrcov eKXoyrjv iXdd>v Kara 5 
rov iavrov rpoirov diroveipiaadaL ro <f>iXov avrco rrjs avrov 
TTarpiBos. 

YlpcorT] fjL€V roLvvv ttoXls re iariv /cat iroXireia /cat vopioi 
dpiGroLy OTTOV ro TTCtAat Xeyopuevov dv yiyvrjrai Kara Trdaav C 
rrjv rroXiv on fidXiara' Aeyerat Se cos dvrcos iarl Kocvd ra 
(j>iX(DV. rovr ovv etre ttov vvv eariv etV ear at TTore — 
KOivds p^ev yvvaiKas, kolvovs he elvai TratSas", KOLvd Se XP'^~ 
pLara avpunavra — /cat naGrj purj^oivf} to Xeyopuevov lSlov 5 
TTavraxddev e/c rod ^iov drrav i^-j^prjrac, pie purjxdvrjr ai S* els 
ro Svvarov /cat to, (f>vaeL tSta Koivd dpifj ye tttj yeyovevai, 
olov o/x/xara /cat (Lra /cat x^lpas Koivd puev opdv hoKeZv /cat 
dKOvetv /cat TTpdrreiv, eTraivelv r av /cat ijjeyeiv /ca^' ei^ ort d 
pidXiara avpLiravras eirl rots avrols x^^P^vras /cat Xvttov- 
pLevovSy /cat Kara hvvapLiv olrives vo/xot p^Lav on pidXiara 
TToXiv direpydt^ovraiy rovrwv virep^oXfj Trpos dperrjv ovSets 
TTore dpov dXXov depuevos opdorepov ovSe ^eXrioj drjGer ai. 5 
ly p,ev 8rj roiavrrj ttoXls, ^Ire ttov 9eol 7) TratSes" deojv avrrjv 
OLKOvat [TrXeuovs evos], ovroj hia^cjvres ev<j>paiv6pievoi Karoi- 
KOVGL' 8t6 Srj TTapdSeLypid ye rroXireias ovk dXXrj XPV ^ 
GKOTTelv, aAA' exopievovs ravrrjs rrjv on pudXiara roiavrrfv 
^rjreiv Kard SvvapLtv. rjv Se vvv rjpLeXs emKex^Lp-qKapLev, etrj 
re dv yevopLevrj ttojs ddavaaias eyyvrara /cat rj /xta Sevrepojs' 

151 



39 e nAAT12N0E 

5 rpirrjv Se /xera ravra, iav deos iOeXrj, BiaTrepavovfjieda. vvv 
8' ovv ravTTjV riva Xeyofjuev Acat ttcos" yevo/jLevrjv av roiavrrjv ; 
NetfJidadajv jxev Sr) TTpaJrov yrjv re Kal oiKtas, Koi /jltj 
740 KOLvfj yeajpyovvTCov, iTreiSrj to tolovtov pbel^ov 7) Kara rrjv 
vvv yeveaLV Kal Tpo(f>rjv /cat TratSeucrtv €Lpr]Taf veixeadcjv S' 
ovv TOiaSe Siavola ttojs, d)s apa Set tov Xa)(6vTa rrjv Xrj^iv 
ravrrjv vofjil^eiv puev kolvtjv avrrjv rrjs TToXecxJS avfXTrdarjs, 

5 TTarpihos Se ovarjg rrjs x^P^^ depaTreveiv avrrjV Set /xet^dvcos" 
r) /JLTjTepa 77atSas', rep Kal hiarroivav deov avrrjv ovoav dvrjrojv 
ovr ojv yeyovevaiy ravrd S' e;^etv StavoT^yuara Kal Trepl rovs 

b eyxoipiovs deovs re ajia Kal Saufjiovas. ottcos S' av ravra et's" 
rov aet xpo^'^v ovrco? exovra VTrdpxj}, rdSe rrpoGSiavorjreov, 
ocrat etcrt rd vvv rj/jiLV ecrrtat Stave/xT^^etcrat rov dptdfiov, 
ravras Setv aet roaavras elvai /cat pufjre rt rrXeiovs yiyveodaL 

5 pLTjre ri TTore iXdrrovs. c5S' ovv av ro roiovrov ^e^aicDs 
yiyvoLro Trepl Trdaav ttoXlv 6 Aa;!^a>v rov KXrjpov Kara- 
XeLTTero) del ravrrjs ri]9 olKTjaeojs eva fiovov KXrjpovopLOv 
rctjv eavrov rraihojv, ov av avro) jxaXiora fj cjyiXov, hidhoxov 

C Kal depaTTevrrjv deotv Kal yevovs koi TToXews rwv re l,ojvra>v 
Kal 600VS av rjSr] reXos els tov rore xpdvov exjj' rovs Se 
dXXovs TratSas", ots av irXeiovs evos yiyvcovrai, drjXeias re 
e/cSo(7^at Kara vopuov rov eTnraxOrjaopievov, dppevds re, ots 

5 av rrjs yeveaecos eXXeiTrrj rwv iroXirajv, rovrocs vets hiavepLeiv , 
Kara x^P^^ H'^^ /xaAtcrra, eav Se riaiv eXXeiTrcoaiv xdpires, rj 
TrXelovs eiriyovoi yiyvojvrat OiqXeis rj nves dppeves eKdarojv, 
7) /cat rovvavriov orav eXdrrovs cLglv, rraihajv d(j)opias yevo- 

d fjievrjs, rrdvrojv rovrcov dpx'^v rjv av dojpieda pLeyiorrrjv Kal 
ripLLOjrdrrjv, avrr) GKeipajjievr] ri XP'^ XPV^^^^ roXs nepiyevo- 
fievoLs 7) roLs eXXeLTTOVcn, tto pilfer oj /xr^xciv'^v on /xaAtcrra 
OTTCOS at TTevraKiaxiXiai Kal rerrapdKovra olKrjueis del pLovov 

5 eoovrai. pbrjxo-val S' etatv rroXXai' Kal yap eTnaxeaeLs 
yeveoreojs ols av evpovs fj yevearis, Kal rovvavriov em- 
/xeAetat /cat OTTOvhal ttXtJOovs yevvrfpidrajv elaiv, rt/xats* re 
Kal drt/xtats' /cat vovderrjaeaL Trpeo^vrcov vepl veovs [Sta Xoyojv 

e vovOerrjrtKOJv] dTravraJoai Svvavrac TTOieZv o Xeyopuev. Kal 
Srj Kal ro ye reXos, av rrdaa arropia Trept rrjv aviuajGiv rwv 
TTevraKLax^Xiojv Kal rerrapdKovra olkojv yuyvrjrai, eTTiXvcns 
Se VTTep^dXXovoa rjfJULV TToXcrajv Sta <j)iXo<f>poGVvriv rrjv rcov 

5 GvvoLKOvvrojv aAATJAots" GVjJL^aLvrj /cat aTTopcojJieVj ro TraXaiov 

152 



N0M12N E 740 e 

TTOV VTrdpX^i' f^'^X^^VH'^* ^ TToXXoLKLS €L7rOfJL€V, iKTTOfJLTTrj 

OLTTOLKLajv, ^LXiq yiyvoixevT] Trapa (fytXcjov, Jjv av iTnrijSeiov 
etvai SoKrj. idv r' av /cat rovvavriov eiTeXdr^ TTore KVfJia 
KaTaKXvGfJLOv <f)€pov voGOJV, t) TToXepLcov (f)6opd, iXdrrovs 8e 74 1 
TToAu rod reray/xeVou dpcdfiov St opcfyavias yivcovrai, eKovras 
fiev ov Set TToXiras Trape/xjSaAActv voSr^ TiatSeta, TTeiraihev- 
jjLevovs, dvdyKTjv 8e ovSe deo? elvat Xeyerai hvvaros /Sta^ecr^atc 

Taur' ovv Srj rov vvv Xeyopuevov Xoyov rjfjLiv ^co/xev 5 
TrapaiveZv Xeyovra' 'Q. Trdvrcov dvSpojv dpioroi, ttjv opLOio- 
TrfTa /cat laorrjra /cat to ravrov /cat ofJLoXoyovfjievov TLpLCjvTes 
Kara (f)VGLV pLTj dvUre /cara re aptdfiov /cat Trdaav SvvajjLLv 
rrjv Tojv KaXojv KayaOcov TrpayjjLarojv /cat Stj /cat vvv rov b 
dpid/jLov fj,€v TTpwTOV Sid ^lov TTavTOs (f)vXd^aT€ rov ^Iprj- 
fjL€vov, etra to rrjs ovuias vijjos re /cat fxeyedos, o to TrpcJorov 
ivelfiaode fieTptov 6v, fir] artjLtaaT^re tw re (hvelcrdai /cat tw 
TTCoXelv TTpds dXXrjXovs' ovte yap 6 velfias KXrjpos d)V deos 5 
VfjLLV GVfifiaxos ovT€ 6 vojJLodeTrjS' vvv yap Srj TvpcoTOV to) 

d7T€ldoVVTL v6p,OS 7rpOGTaTT€L, TTpoeLTTOJV €TtI TOVTOLS KXr]pOV- 

Gdai rov edeXovra 7) pLJj KXr^povGdaL, cos" rrpoarov fiev rrjs c 
yrjs Upas ovGrjs rdjv Trdvrcov decJov, etra Upeojv re /cat 
Upeidjv €i>xds TTOLTjGoiJLevajv inl rocs irpajrois OvfiaGc /cat 
SevrepoLS /cat p^^XP'' '^P^djv, rov irpidp^evov 7) diroSopLevov 
(hv eXax^v OLKOTTeSojv rj yrjTriSojv rd inl rovrois rrpeirovra 5 
7rdGX€LV Trddrj- ypdipavreg 8e iv rots' Upols drjGOVGt KVira- 
ptrrivas p,vrjp,as els rov eVetra XP^^^^ Karayeypap^puevas, 
TTpos rovroLS 8' ert (f)vXaKrT]pLa rovrwv, ottojs av yiyvrjraL, 
KaraGrrjGOVGLV ev ravrrj rojv dpx^JV yjns av o^vrarov opdv d 
SoKTJ, Iva at Trapa ravra eKdGrore Trapayajyal yiyvopLevau pLT] 
XavddvcoGiv avrovSi aXXd KoXd^WGi rov aTretdovvra dp.a vopLCp 
/cat ro) dew. ogov yap 8?) rd vvv eTnrarropLevov dyadov 
ov rvyxdv€L Traoats" rat? TreiOopievais TroAeo-t, rriv eTTOpievrjv 5 
KaraGK€vr]v TrpooXa^ov, /cara rrjv TraXaidv Trapoipiiav ovSels 
etWrat TTore KaKog wv, aAA epLTreipos re /cat eTneLKrjg eOeGi 
yevopievos' ;^/37^/xaTto-yLt6s- yap ovr^ eveGnv G(f)6Spa ev rfj e 
roiavrr) KaraGKevfj, GvveTrerai re avrfj purjSe Selv pnqS^ e^elvai 
Xpr}P'O-ril,eG0 ai rdJv dveXevdepcov ;)(/)T]/xaTto-/xa>i/ pLrjSevl pLrj- 
Seva, KaO^ ogov eTTOveihiGros Xeyopbevq ^avavGia rjdos avro- 
rpeTTeu eXevdepov, pLTjSe ro TrapdTiav d^tovv e/c rwv roLOvrwv 5 
OT^AAeyetv XPVP'^'^^' 

153 



L 



741 e HAATflNOS 

UpO^ TOVTOLS S €T6 VOflOS 67T€TaL TTOiGL TOVTOLS , fJ^^)^* 

742 i^eXvai ;\;pucrov fjL-qSe apyvpov KeKTrjadat fjbr^Seva {jLrjSevl 
lSlcott], vo/jLiafjua Se eveKa dXXayi^s rrjg Kad^ rjfjuepaVy t^v 
SrjjjLLOvpyoLS re aAAarrecr^at a)(eh6v avayKaZov, /cat Trdcnv 

OTTOaCOV XP^^^ '^^^ TOLOVTCOV fXiddoVS pLLadcjTOls J SovAotS" KOL 
5 €TTOLKOLSy aTTOTLVeLV . OJV €V€Kd <f>apLeV TO VO/JLLGfJLa KTTjrdov 

avToZs fJi€V evTifJiov, rols he aXXois dvOpcjirois dSoKL/jbov 
KOLVov Se *EAAi^vt/cov vofjLicrpia eveKO, re crrpareicov /cat oltto- 
SrjfJLLOJV et? Tovs dXXovs dvdpcoTTOVs, otov TTpeo^eichv r^ /cat 

b Tivos dvayKaiag dXXrjs rfj TroAct KTjpvKeiaSy eKTrepureLv rivd 
dv SeTy, Tourcejv X^P^^ dvdyKTj eKdorrore KCKTrjadai rfj TToXet 
v6fjLL<jfjba 'l^XXrjVLKov, lSlcotyj Se dv dpa rrore dvdyKTf tls 
yiyvqrat drrohrffjielv , Trape/xevos" /xei^ rovs dpxovras diroh'q- 

5 fJL€LTOj, v6fJLL(jfJia Sc dv TTodev ex^JV ^evLKov ot/caSc d(f)iKr]raL 
7T€pLy€v6fjL€Vov, rfj TToAct avTO Kara^aXXeTCO Tipos \6yov 
dTToXapL^dvojv ro imx^P'-ov' ISiovfievos Se dv tls ^aivr^rai, 
Srj/jLocnov re yiyveadco /cat o cruyetScus" Kal purj <j)pdl,ojv dpa 
/cat oi^etSet /xera rod dyayovros evoxos €gtoj, /cat ^17/xta 

C Trpos TOVTOLg purj iXdrrovL rod ^eviKOV KopacrOevros vopui- . 
apiaros. yapuovvra Se /cat e/cStSovra /xt^t* ovv StSdvat /XT^re a 
Se;!^eo"^at rrpolKa ro Trapdirav pbrjS* rjvrivovv, pLrjSe vopaapba 1 
TTapaKararideordaL orcp puij rt? Tnarevei, purjSe Savet^etv eirt 

5 roKcp, COS" c^ov' /xt) aTroStSovat ro Trapdirav rep Saveiaapieva) 
/XTyre roKov pujre Ke^dXaiov ravra 8* ort ^eXnar* iarlv 
TToAet inLrrjSevpLara iTnrrjSeveiv, c5Se av rts" gkottcov opOchs 

ci av aura hiaKpivoL, iiravacfyepcov et? tt^v dpxrjv del /cat ri^v 
^OTjXrjGLV . earnv hrj rod vovv exovros iroXirLKov ^ovXtjgls , 
(/>apLev, ovx yjvirep dv ol iroXXol (f)aiev helv ^ovXeadai rov 
dyaddv vopLodeTr]v, d)S pLeytarrjv re etvac rrjv ttoXlv fj voajv 

5 ev vopLoderoXy /cat ort pidXiara TrXovauav, KeKrrip.evqv 8 av 
Xpvaeua /cat dpyvpeua, /cat /caret yrjv /cat Kara ddXarrav 
dpxovaav on TrXeiarajv' Trpoodelev 8* av /cat d)S apiarrrjv 
Selv ^ovXeadat rrjv ttoXlv etvai Kal wg evhaip.oveardr'qv 

e rov ye opdojg vopioOerovvra. rovrwv 8e rd puev Svvara 

eanv yuyveadaL, rd 8' ov Sward' rd puev ovv Svvara ^ov- 

otr av o oiaKoapLcov, ra oe purj ovvara ovr av povAoiro 

/xarata? povX'qaeis ovr dv emx^ipoZ. ax^Sov pLev ydp 

5 evSaipiovas a/xa /cat dyadovs dvdyKrj yiyveadai — rovro puev 
ovv ^ovXoir dv — ttXovoLovs 8' av G(f>6Spa Kal dyadovs 

154 






NOMflN E 742 e 

dSvvaroVf ovs ye Srj ttXovglovs ol ttoaAol KaraXeyovGi' 
Xeyovaiv 8e rovs KeKrrjfjLevovs iv oXiyois tojv avOpojinov 
TrXelarov vofiLafiarog d^ta KTi^/JLara, d /cat KaKos tls KeKrfjr 
dv. el S* eoTLv tovto ovtojs ^X^^> ^^'^ ^^ eycoye avrols 743 
7roT€ avyxojpoLTjv rov ttXovglov evSaLfiova rfj dXrjdeia yi- 
yveodai fjurj Kal dyadov ovra' dyadov Se ovra Sta^opcDS" /cat 

ovGiov etvat oiacpepovrojs aovvarov. It 07); ^atT] rts" 
dv LGOJs. "On J <f)aLiJL€V dvy rj re €k ScKalov /cat dSiKOv Krrjais 5 
TrXeov 7) StTrAacrta iarlv rrjg €k rod St/catof fjiovov, rd re 
dvaXojfjLara fjLi^T€ KaXojs fX'qTe alaxpo^s edeXovra dvaXicKeadai 
rdjv KaXoiv Kal et's" KaXd ideXovrojv hairavdadaL StTrAacrtoj 
iXdrrova' ovkovv Trore dv rcov €k hiTrXaaicov jjiev KTr^p^arcov, b 
rjfiLGeojv Se dvaXajfidrajv 6 rd evavria tovtojv TTparrojv 
yeVotr' dv TrXovaiwrepos . eariv 8c d fiev ay ados tovtojv , 
6 Sc ov KaKos OTav fj (fjetSwXos, tote Se 77ore /cat TTay/ca/cos", 
aya^ds" Se, 6Ve/3 et/JT^rat ret vw, ouSeVore. d ^ei^ ydp St- 5 
Kala)s Kal aSt/ccos" Xa/x^dvajv Kal /Lti^re St/catcos" /x?yT€ dSt/ccos" 
dvaXiGKCxiv ttXovglos, otov Kal ^etScuAd? 7^, d Se Tray/ca/cos", 
COS" rd TToAAd cejv dacuTOs, /xdAa iriv-qs' d 8e dvaAtcr/ccov re 
ets" rd /caAd /cat KTCjfxevos €/c rdiv St/catcov pLovov ovt dv C 
^Lacfjdpatv ttXovtco pahiojs dv ttotc yivoiTO ou8 av cr^oSpa 
TTevrjs. a)GT€ 6 Adyos" i^jLtti^ opOos, d)S ovk elolv ol irap,- 

oucrtot ayauoL' et o€ /xt) ayaooi, ovoe evoatpLoves. 

'HpLLV Se -J^ '^djv vopLOJV VTTodeGLS ivTavOa e^Xenev, ottcos 5 
ws €vSai,pLOV€aTaTOL eaovTai Kal drt /xdAtcrra dAAT^Aots" <^tAof 
etev 8e ov/c dv Trore TroAtrat (j)iXoL, ottov noXXal pukv 8t/cat 
iv dAATyAots" €t€v, TToAAat Se dSt/ctat, dAA' dVof cos" drt d 
apLLKpoTaTai Kal oXiyiGTai, XdyopLcv Srj pLTjT€ xp^^ov Setv 
pLTjTe dpyvpov iv ttj TrdAet, /xi^re av ;^/[)7^/>taTtCT)Ltdv ttoXvv Std 
^avavalas Kal tokcov /xt^Sc ^oaKT^pLaTCOv ala^pcov, dXX ocra 
yeojpyla StSojat /cat </>epet, /cat roirrcov dirooa pur] ^(^pripiaTit^o- 5 
pevov dvayKd(J€L€v d/xeAetv cuv eve/ca 7T€(f)VK€ rd xPVf^^'''^' 
raura 8' eart '/'u;^?) /cat crcD/xa, d x^P^^^ yvpivaGTLKrjs Kal 
TTJs dXXrjs TratSetas" od/c dv Trore yevoiTO d^ia Xoyov. Std e 
Si) ;^/37^/x,dra>v eTit/xeAetav od;^ dna^ elpiJKapLev cos XPV '^^^^^~ 
Tatov TLpidv ovTwv yap Tpidjv rcov airavTCOv irepi a irds 

dvdpWTTOS G7TOvSdi^€L, TeXeVTaloV Kal TpiTOV ioTLV 7) TOJV 
Xpy^P-aTOJV OpdoJS GTTOvSa^OpLeVT] GTTOvSlj, GOjpiaTOS Se TTC/Ot 5 

pi€G7], TTpojTT] Se tJ r^s" ^^XV^' '^^^ ^''7 '^^^ *^^^ "^^ Ste^epxo- 

155 



^ 



743 e nAAT12N02 

fieda TToAtretW, el fxev ras TLfias ovtoj rdrTeraL, opOcos 
vevofJLoder'qTaL' el Se tls tcov TTpoorarroixevcov avroOi vofJLOJV 
744 cra)(f)po<jvpr]£ kjxirpoodev vyieiav €v rfj vroAet (jjavelTai ttolcov 
TLpbiaVy 7) ttXovtov vycelas /cat rod aaxfypovelv y ovk opOcjs 
avacfyavelrai riddfievos. tovt ovv Stj ttoXXolkls iTnarjpLal- 
veodai XPV ''"^^ vofjLoderrjV — Tt re ^ouAo/xat; Kal Et /xot 

5 avpL^alvei tovto ^ Kal a7TOTvy)((ivoj tov gkottov; — Kal ovtoj 

rax* av tacos ^k rrjs vofiodealas avros re eK^aivoi Kal tovs 

aAAov£ aTTaAAarroL, /car aAAov oe rpoirov ovo av eva irore. 

'0 Srj Xaxojv KeKTrjudo}, ^a/xeV, tov KXrjpov inl tovtols 

b ots elpiJKajjLev. rjv pLev Srj KaXov Kal rdAAa tcra ttovt* 
e^pvra eva eKaorov iXdelv els ttjv drrocKLav e77€tSi^ 8e ov 
BvvaroVy oAA' 6 pLev ns rrXeioj KeKrrjpievos a^t^erat XPV' 
pLara, 6 S* eXdrrova, Set Srj ttoXXojv eveKa, raJv re Kara 

5 ttoXlv Kacpcov loorrjros eveKa, TLpnqp^ara dvcaa yeveadac, iva 
dpxo^i T€ Kal ela(f)opal Kal Scavopial rrjv rrjs d^ias eKdarois 
TipLrjv pLTj /car' dperrjv piovov rrjv re Trpoyovcxjv Kal ttjv avrov, 

C pLTjSe Kara croj/xarcuv Icjx^s Kal evpLop(f)Las, dXXd Kal Kara 
ttXovtov xPV^^^ '^^^ TTeviaVy rds npids re Kal dpxds cos 
laairara rep dviacp avpLpLerpco 8e dnoXapL^dvovres pLr) 8ta- 
<f>ep<x>VTai. TOVTWV X^P^^ rerrapa pueyedeL rrjs ovaias ripL-q- 

5 piara Trotetcj^at xP^^^y "Trpojrovs Kal hevrepovs Kal rpirovs 
Kal rerdprovs , rj riGLV dXXois irpoaayopevopievovs ovopLaatv, 
orav re pLevcoatv ev rco avrw rLpLTJpLan Kal drav ttXov- 
GLOjrepoL eK Trevqrcov Kal eK TrXovaicov Treviqres yiyvopuevoL 

d pbera^aivcoGiv els ro TrpocrfJKOv eKaaroL eavrolGiv rtpLTjpia. 
TdSe 8' e*7rt rovroLS av vopLov ax'^P'OL eyojye av rLdelrjv (hs 
eTTopLevov. Set yap ev TToAet ttov, (f)apL€V, rfj rod pLeyiorov 
voGijpLaros ov piede^ovarj, o Staaraatv 7) ardaiv opdorepov 

5 av etT^ KeKXijadaLy pbrjre Treviav rrjv x^^^'^W ^^^^^^^ irapd 
riGLV rojv TToXiraJv pbijre av irXovrov, ws dpLcjyorepajv riKrov- 
rcjv ravra dpi(f)6repa' vvv ovv opov Set rovrcov eKarepov 
rov vopLo6err]v <j)pd^eiv. "Ecttco Srj irevlas piev opos rj rod 

e KX-qpov npL'^, ov Set pueveiv Kal ov dpxojv ovSels ovhevi irore 
TTepcoifjerai eXdrrw yiyvopuevov , rwv re dXXcov Kara ravrd 
ovSets" oans (jjiXoripios ctt' dperfj. p,erpov Se avrov Oepievos 
6 vopLoOerrjs BiirXdacov edoei rovrov Krdadai Kal rpcnXdaLOV 

c Kal P'expt' rerpaTrXaoiov rrXeiova S av ns Krdrai rovrojv, 
evpojv 7] Sodevrcov irodev 7) ;)(/37^/>taTtcra/>tevos", r] rivc tvxJ] 

156 



N0MI2N E 745 a 

roLavTT) KT-qadixevos dXXr] ra Trepiyiyvo^eva rod ixirpov, rfj 745 
TToAet av avrd /cat rots" rrjv ttoXlv expvGiv deols aTTOvefiajv 
evSoKLfjios T€ /cat dt^Tj^iios dv ctrj' idv Se tls dTTeidij tovtco 

TO) VOfJLCpy <f)aV€X fl€V 6 ^OvX6fJL€VO£ €7Tl ToZs Tj/JLLUeGLV, O 0€ 

o^Xojv dXXo TOGOVTOV fJi€pos aTTOTeLaeL rrjs avrov KTrjaews, 5 
ra 8' rjfjLLG€a rwv Oedju. r) Se KTrjats x^P^^ '''^^ KXrjpov 
TrdvTOJV TTaora Iv rco <f)av€pcp yeypdcj^doj Trapd (f)vXa^LV 
dpxovuiv, ols dv 6 vojjLos Trpoard^rj, dirajs dv at 8t/cat Trept 
Trdvrojv doct els XPVl^'^'^^ paStat re cSat /cat cr(f)6Spa cra^ets". D 

To Srj fierd tovto irpajrov fiev ttjv ttoXlv ISpvauai Set 
TTJ? ;^copas' on fjudXiara iv /xeao), /cat raAAa oaa 7TpoG<popa 
TToAet rdjv VTTapxdvTWV exovra tottov iKXe^d/juevov, d vorJGai 
re /cat elirelv ovhev x^^XeTTov /xera Se ravra piipr] Sc68e/ca 5 
SteXeardaL, difxevov 'Ecrrtas" TTpcjTOV /cat Atos" /cat Adrjvds 
UpoVy dKpoTToXiv ovofidl^ovra, kvkXov Tre/otjSaAAoi^ra, a(j> 
ov rd SaJSe/ca fxepr] refiveLV rrjv re ttoXlv avrrjv /cat irdaav C 
TT]!' x^P^^' '•O'^ ^^ ^^'' yiyveoOaL rd ScoSe/ca /xep?^ roi ra 
pikv dyaOrjs yrjs etvai GfjLiKpd, rd Se x^^p^^os /xet^co. kXtj- 
povs oe SteAetv rerrapdKOvra /cat TrevraKLaxi^Xiovs , tovtojv 
T€ av ^ixo- refieXv e/cacrrov /cat crvyKXrjpdjGaL hvo rpnqpLara, 5 
To£> re iyyvs /cat rou iroppoj pLerexovra eKarepov, to irpos 
rfj TToAet ixepos rep irpos rols iaxdroLS [elg KXrjpos], /cat ro 
hevrepov diro TToXecos rco 0,77' i^xdrajv Sevrepw, /cat rdAAa d 
ovTOJs TTavra. fjLrjxo.vdadaL 8e /cat €v rots 8t;\;a Tp.rip.aaL to 
vvvSrj Xeyopievov (f)avX6TrjT6s re /cat apeTrjs x^P^^f eirav- 
iGOvpuevovs TO) TrXrjdei re /cat oAtyoTTyrt riys" Siavopirjs. 
vci(xai 8e 817 /cat rous" dvhpas SwSeKa P'^pr], ttjv ttjs dXXrjg 5 
ovdias els tcra ort /xaAtcrra ra ScijSe/ca jLtcpTy GVVTa^dp,€Vov, 
d7Toypa(f)7Js TravTcov yevopievrjs' /cat 817 /cat puera tovto 
Scu8e/ca deoXs 8a)8e/ca /cAi^pof s" devTas, iTTOVopbdaaL /cat /ca^- 
tepcoCTat TO Aa;(ov pLepos iKauTCo tw deep, /cat <f)vXrjv avTTjV C 
iTTOvopbduai. TepLveLV 8' au /cat ra 8a)8e/ca r-^s" TToAca)? t/xt^- 
/Ltara roi^ aurov TpoTTOV dvirep /cat tt^i' dXXqv ;)^ajpav 8te- 
vepiov /cat 8uo vepLeadai e/cao-roi/ ot/CT^aet?, rryv re eyyvs" 

TOU pLEGOV /cat TT^l^ TcDl^ €GxdT(x)V . /Cat TT^V /X6V KaTOLKlGLV 5 

ovTio TeXos ^X^^^' 

'Ei/vo€tv Se T^/xas" TO TOtovSc €GTLV ;)^p€cov €/c TTavTOS rpo' 
TTOV, d)s rd vvv elpTjpLeva Trdvra ovk dv TTore ecs roiovrovs 
Kaipovs Gvp,7T€GOLy wGTe GvpL^rjvai Kard Xoyov ovroj avp,- 

157 



46 a n AATfiNOS 

746 Travra yevofieva, dvSpas re ol (jltj hvGx^pavovai rrjv rocavTTjV 
avvoLKLav, aAA' virofjievovaiv xP'^JP'O-tol re exovres ra/cra /cat 
jLteVpta Sta jStou iravros Kac Traihcov yeveaeis a? elpj^Kafiev 
eKaGTOLS, Kol ;\;/Dfcrou arepopievoL /cat irepcov ojv hrjXos 6 

5 vofxoderrjs Trpoard^wv eanv €k tovtcov tcov vvv elprjpbevojv, 
€Tt, 8e x^P^^ '^^ ^^^^ aareos, cos €Lp7]K€V, jLtecroTTyras' re /cat 
€V kvkXco oiKTjcreLS Travrrj, cfx^Sov olov oveipara Xeyojv, 7) 
TrXdrraJv Kaddirep €/c KTjpov nva rroXiv /cat TToXiras. ^X^^ 

b §''7 TO, Tocavra ov /ca/ccDs" rtva rpoirov elprj/jueva, XPV ^' ^''^" 
avaXapL^dveiv irpos avrov ra roiaSe. irdXiv dpa r)fiLV 6 
vofModerajv (f)pd^€i roSe' Ev rovrois rots' Adyot?, c5 <^tAot, 
/xTyS' auTov 80/cetTe />t€ XeXrjdevat to vvv Xeyopuevov co? 

5 dXrjdrj hie^ipx^TCii nva rporrov. dXXd yap iv eKdarois rcJov 
fjLeXXovTOJv eaeadai St/catorarov oljxaL ro^e elvau, tov ^6 
TTapdheiypia SeiKvvvra, otov 8et to i7TLX€ipovjjL€vov ytyvecr^at, 
fjLTjSev aTToXeiireiv tcov KaXXiaTCOv re /cat dXrjdeaTdTCoVy cL 8e 

C a8waTdv TL Gvp^^aivei tovtcov yiyveadac, tovto jxkv avTo 
eKKXiveiv /cat fir] rrpdrTeiv, otl 8e tovtov tcov Xoittcov 
iyyvTard €gtlv /cat GvyyeveGTaTOv €(f)V tcov TrpoGrjKovTcov 
7TpdTT€LV, TOVT avTO SiafjirjxcLvoiGd ai oTTCos dv ylyvTjTat, tov 

5 vofxodeTTjv 8* eacrat TeXos eVt^etvat ttj PovXt]G€l, yevopiivov 
8e TOVTOVf TOT* rjSrj Kot,vfj pueT €K€ivov GKorrelv otl re Gvpi- 
(f)€peL TCOV elprjpievcov /cat rt rrpoGavTes euprjTaL ttjs vopLo- 
deGLas' TO yap opboXoyovpuevov avTo avTcp 8et ttov TravTaxfj 
d diTepyd^eGdaL /cat tov tov ^avXordrov Srjpaovpyov d^iov 
eGopuevov Xoyov," 

Nw 87^ TOVT* avTO TTpodvpLTjTeov ISetv pL€Td Ty^5 bo^,6.aY\q 
TCOV ScoSeKa puepcov hiavopirjsy to rtVa Tpoirov SrjXov Srj to, 

5 ScoSeKa piiprjy tcov ivTos a5 nXeiGTag exovTa Siavopids, 
/cat Ta TOVTOLs GvverropLeva /cat €/c tovtcov yevvcopLeva, p^exp^ 
TCOV T€TTapdKovTd T€ /cat rrevTaKiGX^Xicov — odev (jypaTpias /cat 
Srjpiovs Kal KcopuaSy /cat irpos ye ra? TToXepuKas ra^ets" re 

e Kal dycoydsy /cat ert vopLiGpuaTa /cat puerpa irjpd t€ /cat ?5y^a 
/cat GTadpid — Travra raura epLpLerpd re /cat dAATyAots" o-y^- 
(f)cova Set rdv ye vopLOV TdTTetv. Trpos 8e tovtois ovh 
e/cetva (f)o^7]T€a, SeiGavTa ttjv So^aGav dv yiyveGdai Gpn- 

5 KpoXoyiaVy dv rts" npoGrdTTrj rrdvTa ottog dv GKev-q /cra>i/rat, 
pLTjSev dpL€Tpov avTCOv idv elvaiy /cat kolvw Xoyo) vopiLGavTa 

747 TT/Dos" TrdvTa etvat p^/^T^at/xou? ras" rcDv dpidpucov Siavopuag /cat 

158 



N0M12N E 747 a 

TTOiKiXaeis, ocra re avrol ev iavrols TTOiKiXkovrai kol ocra 
iv ixTjKeai /cat eV pddeGi TrotACtA/xara, Kal 8rj /cat cV <j)d6yyoLS 
/cat KLvijcreat rals re /caret rrjv evdviroplav rrjs dvco /cat Kara) 
<l>opdg /cat rrjs kvkXo) 7T€pi<f)opds' Tvpos yap ravra Trdvra 5 
Set ^Xiifjavra rov ye vopLoderrjv TTpocrrdrreiv rots' TroAtratS" 
TTaGLv els hvvapLLV TOVTCOV firj (XTToXeLTTeGdaL TT]s avvrd^eoJS' 
TTpos re yap olKOvofxiav /cat irpos TToXiretav /cat Trpos rds b 
T€)(vas Trdaas ev ovhev ovrco Svpaijuiv e^ei naiheiov piddrjfjLa 
fjLeydXrjv, cos rj Trepl rovs dpiBp^ovs hiarpi^rj' to he pueyLGTOVy 
OTL rov vvard^ovra /cat dpuadrj <f)VGei eyeipei /cat evp^adrj /cat 
pLvrjpLova /cat dy)(^ivovv direpydl^erai, napd Tiqv avrov <f)VGLV 5 
eVtStSovra ^eto. rexvr]. ravra Stj Trdvra, edv puev dXXoLS 
vopLOLS re /cat cTrtrT^Seu/xacrtv d(f)aLprjraL rts" rr]v aveXevdepiav 
/cat <f>LXo-)(pripLariav e/c rwv i/jv^aJv rcjv p.eXX6vrojv avrd 
LKavws re /cat ovrjGipLOJS KrrjGeGdaiy KoXa rd rraiSevpLara /cat c 
TTpoGrjKovra yiyvoir* dv el he pLrj, rrjv KaXovpbevrjv dv rtS" 
rravovpyiav dvrl G0<j)ias dnepyaGdpLevos XdOoc, Kaddirep 
AlyvTTrlovs /cat OotVt/cas" /cat ttoAAo, erepa aTreipyaGpieva 
yevTj vvv eGriv Iheiv vtto rrjs rcov dXXwv emrrfhevpLdrcov /cat 5 
KrrjpLdrojv dveXevdeplas, eXre ris vopioderr^s avrols <j)avXos 
dv yevopievos e^rjpydGaro rd roiavra e'ire "xaXerrrj rv^T] 
TTpoGTreGovGa elre /cat (f)VGLs dXXrj ns roLavrrj. /cat ydp, d 
60 MeytAAe re /cat KAetyta, pLrjhe rovd^ T^/xas" Xavdaverco rrepl 
roTTOJV COS ovK elGlv dXXoL nves Sta^e/oovres" dXXcov roircov 
TTpos rd yevvdv dvdpcoTTOVs dpcetvovs /cat ;^€tpous', ols ovk 
evavria vopboderrjreov' ol puev ye ttov 8ta rrvevpiara Travrola 5 
/cat 61* clAT^O'ets' dXXoKoroi re eloiv /cat evaiGioi avrcov, ol he 
hi vhara, ol he Kal St' avrrjv rr)v Ik rrjs yrjs rpo(f)ijvy dva- 
hihovGav 01) puovov roZs GcopuaGLV dp,elvco Kal -xelpco, rats he e 
iJjv')(aZs ovx rjrrov hvvapLevrjv Trdvra rd roiavra epLTroielv, 
rovrcov S' av Trdvrcov pLeycorov hLa<j>epoLev dv roTToi •)(cx)pas 
ev ols deia ris eTTiTTvoLa Kal haipiovcov Xrj^eLS etev, rovs del 
KaroLKL^opLevovs IXecp he)(opLevoL Kal rovvavriov. ols d ye 5 
vovv ex^Lov vopLoderrjs, eTTiGKeijjdpievos cos dvOpcoTTOV olov r 
earLV GKOTreXv rd roiavra, ovrco TTecpwr* dv ndevai rovs v6- 
piovs. o hr] Kal Gol TTOL'qreoVy cS KActvta* Trpcorov rperrreov 
eTTL ra roiavra pieXXovri ye /carot/ct^etv p^cu/oaj^. 

KA. 'AAA', <L ^eve ^Adrjvaie, Xeyeis re TrayKdXcos epioi 10 
re ovrcos Troirjreov. 

159 



BOOK VI 

SHORT ANALYSIS 

I. Apx6vT(DV alpecreis kuI eTrtTr^Sev/xara. 

(1) 752 g1- — No/xo^uAaK€5. 

(2) 755 ^ ^' — STparryyot, iTnrapyoi^ ra^iap^oL^ <^vXap\OL. 

(3) 756 1) 7. — BovAevrat (757 >} dXijOiaTOLTrj Kal apLcrrr] 

IcroT-qs ; the lot as an auxiliary agent in elections) ; 
UpvTaveLS. 

(4) 759- — 'lepets and other temple officials. 

(5) 760 3. 6. — 'AypovofxoL. 

(6) 763 C 3. 'A(TTVv6pOL. 

(7) 763 C 4. — 'AyopavopoL. 

(8) 764 C 5. — M.ovcrLK7j<^ T€ Kal yvfivacTTLKYJs apx^ovre'i — (a) 

TratSetas, (h) dyoivtas. (The TratSetas eTrt/xeAryrrys far the 
most important of all state officials.) 
(9) 766 d 2. — AiKaa-Tai. 
II. Nop^oOea-ta. 

(768 e 1-77^ ^ ^- — ^^® must make the No/xo<^i'AaKes capable of 
legislating, for many rectifications and additions to tlie laws will 
be needed as time goes on.) 

771 ^ 5- — Distribution of the 5040 households into tribes and 
other divisions. — Social Festivals. 

771 ^ 1- — Marriage. 

773- — -The principles which should guide the choice of wife or 
husband. 

774 3.- — Marriage a duty to the state. 

774 C 3. — Dowries forbidden. 

774 G ^- — Legal and religious ceremonies attending marriage. 

77^ a,.— The young couple to remove to the country house. 

776 b 5. — Property, especially in slaves — their treatment. 

778 b. — Building, public and private. 

779 d '^' — '^^^ regulation of the first ten years of married life, 
and the state's interference with private life, especially that of 
women : advisability and possibility of such interference. 

785- — Ages for marriage, military and official service. 

160 



N0M12N S' 751a 



A0. 'AAAo, fiTjv fxerd ye iravTa ra vvv elprjixcva cr;)^€8oi^ 75^ 
dv dpxojv elev aoi Karaurdaeis rfj 77oAet. 

KA. *'E;^e6 yap ovv ovtoj. 

A0. Avo etSrj ravra irepl TToXireias Koafiov ycyvopLeva 
Tvyxdveiy Trpcorov fxev Karaardaeis dpxojv re Kal dp^ovrcjv, 5 
ocras" T€ auras' elvai Set Koi rpoirov ovriva Aca^tara/xeVas • 
eTretra ovro) Stj tovs vofjiovs rat? apx^-ls iKdarais dirohoriov, 
ovGTLvds T€ av Kal oaovg Kal otovs TrpoaiJKOv dv e/cacrrat? b 

elu). GfJLLKpOV 8e i.7rL(JXpVT€S 7Tp6 TTJS alpeG€(X}S , €L7Ta>fJL€V 

TTpoarjKovrd riva Xoyov rrepl avrrjs pr^drjvai. 

KA. TtVa 8r} TOVTOv; 

A0. Tovhe. TTavTL 7TOV StjXov TO TOiovTov , OTL jjLeydXov 5 
TrJ£ vojModeGias ovros epyov, rod ttoXlv ev TrapecjKevaajxivrjv 
ap^as dv€7Ttrr]8€LOV£ eTTLorrrjaai tols €V K€Lp,ivoLS vofjLOLSy ov 
fjLovov ovSev nXeov ev redivrcov, ovh^ on yeXios dv irdfJuroXus 
GVfJL^aivoL, dx^hov 8e ^Xd^ai Kal Xoj^ai ttoXv fjueyLGrai raZs C 
TToXeGi yiyvoLVT dv i^ avroJv. 

KA. Ucos yap ov; 

A0. TovTO TOLVvv voijaajfjiev aoL irepl rrjs vvv, <L <f)LX€, 
TToXireias re /cat TroXecos avpL^aXvov. opas yap on irpajrov 5 
p.€V 8et Tovs opdcjs lovras em ra? rajv dp^/ov SvvdfjLeLS ^d- 
aavov LKavTjv avrovs re /cat yevog eKaarojv e/c TrauScov /xe;^/[)i 
TrJ9 alpeG€OJs elvai Se8a>/cdTas', eVetra av rovs fJiiXXovras 
alprjaeadaL T6dpd(f)daL [re] ev rjdeai vopLcov ev TreTraLSevfjievov^ 
irpos t6 Svax^pcLtvovrds re Kal dirohexopLevovs opBojs Kpiveiv d 
/cat diTOKpLveLv Svvarovg yiyveadai rov£ d^iovs eKarepojv 
ravra Se ol vecoarl GVveXrjXvdores ovres re dXXriXcov d- 
yvcjjreSy en 8* aTratSeurot, ttcjs dv irore Svvatvro dpuepLTTrcj^ 
rds dpxds alpeladaL; 5 

KA. Ij;^e8op' ovK dv irore. 

A0. *AAAa yap dycjva Trpo^daei^ ^acrtv ov irdvv Bex^- 
cr^at* /cat Stj /cat crot rovro vvv Kal ifiol TTOLrjreov, eTTeiTrep 
crv [xev hr] rrjv ttoXlv VTTearr]^ rep K.prjrci)v edvec rrpodvpLCos C 
KaroLKLeZv SeKaros avros, d)S 4*Tl^» '^^ vvv, eyw 8' ad aol 
(TvXXrj^eGdai Kara rr)V rrapovGav 'qpuXv ra vvv pivdoXoyiav, 75^ 
ovKovv hiqTTov Xeycov ye dv fivdov dKe<f)aXov eKcjv /caraAt- 
VOL. I 161 M 



J a nAAT12N02 

TToifiL' TrXavcofievog yap av aTravri? tolovtos cov ayiop^os 
^aivoiTO. 
5 KA. "AptCTT* €Lpr]Ka^, a> ^4v€. 

A0. Ov fJLovov ye, dXXa Kal Spdaco Kara Svya/jiLV ovtoj. 
KA. Ildvv jJLev ovv TTocajpiev fJTrep /cat Xeyofiev. 
A0 . "Ecrrat ravr , ai^ Oeog ideXrj Kal yrfpcos iTnKparcjfxev 
TO y€ Toaovrov. 
b KA. 'AAA* eiKos ideXeiv. 

A0. EtK-o? yap ovv. eTTOfievoL Se avrcp Aaj8a>/xev Kal 
ToSe. 

KA. To TToZov; 
5 A0. ^Q.£ dvhpeicos Kal TTapaKeKivhwevpiivcDS iv Ta> vvv 
Tj ttoXls rjfjLLV ecrrat KarwKLGjJievr) . 

KA. Ilept TL ^XeTTwv Kal ttoZ /xaAtara avro €LpT]Kas rd 
vvv; 

A0. 'Qs evKoXoJS Kal d<j)6^ios direipois dvhpdai vofjLO- 

lo OeTOVjjiev, ottcos Se^ovrat rrore rovs vvv reOivras v6p.ovs. 

hrjXov he TO ye rocrovrov, cL KActvta, iravrl ax^hov Kal rep 

C jLtT] TTavv oo(f)(x), TO p^T] pahiojs ye avrovs pnqhevas Trpocr- 

he^euBai Kar^ dp^ds, €l Se peivaipLev ttojs roaovrov xpdvov 

eojs ol yevadp^evoL TralSes rcJov v6p,(x)v Kal ovvrpa^evres 

LKavoJS uvvqOeis re avroZs yevopievoi rcov dpxo.i'p^cncJov rfj 

5 TToAet TrduTj KOLvcjvrjaeiav yevop,evov ye p.rjv ov Xeyopuev, 

elirep nvl rpoTTcp Kal P'y]X^^fi y^y^ocro 6pda>s, ttoXXtjv eycoye 

da^dXeiav olpai Kal pier a rov rore irapovra xP^vov av 

yeveodai rov puelvai rrjv TTaihaywy-qdeXcrav ovrco ttoXlv. 

d KjV. "E;)^et yovv Xoyov. 

A0. "ISojpLev roLvvv Trpos rovro et Trrj riva TTopov iKavov 
Tropii^OLpuev av Kara rdSe. (jyrjpX ydp, c5 KAttvta, Kvwglovs 
XP'^vai rojv dXXojv Sia(f)ep6vrco£ KpT^Tcuv prj pLovov d^ooioj- 
5 aaadai irepi rrjs x^P^^ V^ ^^^ KaroiKil^ere , crvvr6va>s 8 
€7np,eXr]drjvaL rd? rrpcoras dpxds els hvvapav ottojs av 
arcoGLV COS d(j<f)aXe(jrara Kal dpiora. rds pLev ovv dXXas 
e Kal ^paxvrepov epyov, vopiocjyvXaKas S' 0/xtv Trpcorovs alpel- 
odai dvayKaiorarov dTrdorj arrovhrj. 

KLA. TtVa ovv errl rovrcp rropov /cat Aoyov dvevpiGKopLev ; 

A0. TovSe. (jyrjpLi, cL TralSes K/ot^tcDv, xP^^^^ KvcootofS', 

5 8ta TO TTpea^eveiv rajv ttoXXcov noXecov, KOLvfj pierd rcov 

d<j)LKopievcji)v els rrjv gvvolktjglv ravrrjv i^ avrcov re Kal 

162 



N0M12N r 752 6 

€K€lva)v alpeloOaL rpiaKovra fjikv /cat eTrra rov9 Trdvrag, 
iwea Se /cat Se/ca €k tcxjv iTTOLKrjGdvrojv , tov£ Se aAAous" 
ef auT-^? Kvojaou' rourous" 8' ot Kvcoatot ttJ TrdAet croi 753 
Sop'TOJi', /cat auTOJ^ ae ttoXIttjv etvac ravrrjs rrj^ aTTOLKias 
/cat eva rcDv o/crcu/catSe/ca, Treto-avrcs" "^ r^ fxerpLa Swa/xet 
^tacrdfJLevoL. 

KA. Tt S^ra 01) /cat cru re /cat o MeytAAos", cS feW, 5 
iKOLVOJV7]Gdrr)v rjfxtv rrjs TToXireias ; 

A0. Mcya /xev, c5 KAetvta, (j)povov(Jiv at ^Adrjvai, pueya 
Se /cat 7^ ^Trdprrj, /cat fxaKpav aTTOiKOvaiv eKdrepai' aol Sc 
/caret Tvdvra ifjifieXcos ^x^l /cat rots' aAAots" oiKiorais Kara 
ravrd, (Lcnrep rd 7T€pl gov vvv Xeyofxeva. co? /xev ovv yevoir* b 
av €7TL€LKeGrara e/c rcDv V7Tap)(6vTwv rjfjLLV rd vvv, elpi^ada), 
TTpoeXdovros he xpovov /cat jJLeivdaiqs rrjs TToXireias , alpeais 
avTcbv earoj rotaSe rts" Yidvres /xev kolvojvovvt ojv rrjs rcov 
dpxovTOJV alpeaecus oTroaoLTrep dv OTrXa tTTTrt/ca t) 7re^t/ca 5 
TtddjvraL /cat TroXepiov KeKOiviovrjKcoGLV iv rat? GcjyerepaLs 
avTOJV rrjg T^At/ctas" SvvdfjLeGLV TTOielGdai 8e rT^v atpecrtv ev 
t€/3aj 0716/9 av 77 TToAts" rjyrjraL rt/xtc6rarov, <j)ip€iv 8' CTrt rov c 
rou ^eou jSco/xov €KaGrov ets" Trtva/ctoy ypdi/javra rovvofia 
TTarpodev /cat (f)vX'r]s /cat StJ/xou oirodev dv SrjfjLorevrjraL, 
7Tap€yypa(f)€LV Se /cat ro aurou /cara raura ovrcos ovofia. 
ra> ^ovXofjLevo) 8 e^eGTOj rcbv irivaKLCov drnrep dv ^aivr]rai ^ 
/XT7 /cara vow aura) yeypapifxevov dveXovra els dyopdv delvai 
fjLTj eXarrov rpidKovra rjfjLepdjv. rd 8e ra>v TTivaKicov Kptdevra 
iv rrpcoTOis p^^XP^ rpiaKOGicov SeZ^ai rous" dpxovras ISetv 
TrdGT) rfj TToXei, t7]v Se ttoXcv coGavroJS Ik tovtojv <j)€p€LV d 
irdXiv ov dv €KaGTOs ^ovXiqrai, tovs 8e ro Sevrepov i^ avrcov 
irpoKpiOivras e/carov 8et^at rrdXiV aTiaatv. ro 8e rpirov 
(f)€percx) p,€V €K rcov eKarov 6 . ^ovXrjdels ov dv ^ovXiqraL, 
8ta ropiicxjv 7TOpev6pL€vos' eirrd 8e /cat rpidKOvra, ols. dv 5 
TrXeiGraL yevcovrac i/jrj(f)Oi, Kpivavres d7TO(f)r)vdvra)V dpxovras . 

Tlv€s ovv, CO KAetvta /cat MeytAAe, Trdvra rjpLLV ravr* iv 
rij TToXeL KaraGrrjGOVGL rcov apxd)V re iripi /cat SoKip^aGiaJv e 
avrojv; dpa ivvoovp,€V d)S rat? Trpwrov ovroj Kara^evyvv- 
jLtevat? TToXeGLV dvdyK-q jLtev etvai rivas, olrtves Se etev av 
Trpos" Traaojv rcov dpxcov yeyovores, ovk eGnv; Set p,r]v dp^ws 
ye TTOJSi /cat ravra ov <f)avXovs oAA ort /xaAtcrra aKpovs. 5 
d/3X''7 yolp Acyerat p.ev 'qp.iGv Travros [iv raXs Trapot/xtaty] 

163 



53 e HAATfiNOS 

epyov, Kol TO ye KaXcos ap^aaOai ttolvtcs iyKOJfjiLdi^ojjiev 

iKOLcrrore' to S* euTW t€, ws efxol ^atverat, ttAcov r^ to 

754 ''7/^tCTU, KOL ouSet? avTo koXcjs yevofxevov ey/ce/cco/xta/cev 

LKaVOJS. 

KA. 'Op^orara Aeyets". 

A© . Mt) Toivvv yiyvojuKOVTeg ye Trapcofiev avTO appr]TOV, 
5 jxrjhev StaoracfyiqcyavTes rjjJiiv avTols TLva eoTai Tpoirov. eyoj 
fjLev ovv ovhafjLoJs evTTopoj ttX-^v ye evos elirelv irpos to irapov 
avayKaiov kol Gvpi(f)€povTOS Xoyov. 
KA. TtVos" Sij; 

AG). Oi^jLtt TaTJTTj Tjj TToXei, TJv otKL^ctv jJieXXofjiev , otov 
lo TraTepa Kal fJLTjTepa ovk elvai ttXtjv ttjv KaTOiKil^ovaav avTrjv 

b TToXlV, OVK dyVOOJV OTL TToXXai TOJV KaTOlKloBeiGCJjV hld(j)OpOL 

Tois KaTOLKiadaats TToXXdKi? eVtat yeyovaauv Te Kal eaovTai, 
vvv [jirjv ev to) irapovTi, Kaddrrep TTotSy et /cat ttotc pueXXei 
Sid(f)opo£ elvat tois yevvrjaaoiv, ev ye ttj Trapovo-rj TratStas" 

5 aTTopia uTepyei Te Acat crrepyerat vtto tojv yevvrjaavTcov , Kal 
cf)evya>v del Trpos Tovg olKeiovs, avayKaiovs jjlovovs evpiGKei 
avjjLfidxov?' d Srj vvv ^-qpn YLvcjjglols Sta ttjv eTTipLeXeiav 

C Trpos TTjv veav ttoXlv Kal ttj via rrpos Kvojgov vrrdp^eiv 
eToipiCDS yeyovoTa. Xeya> Si], KaOdirep e'lTTOV vvvhrj, — his yap 
TO ye KaXov prjOev ovSev ^XdiTTei — Kva>GiOVs Selv eTTCfJLeXr]- 
drjvai ndvTOJV tovtcjv KOLvfj, rrpoGeXopievovs tojv els ttjv 

5 aiTOLKiav d(f)LKopieva)v, tovs rrpeo^VTdTOVs Te Kal dpioTOVs 
els SvvapLLv eXopuevovs, p^r) eXaTTOV e/carov dvSpojv Kal avTcov 
Kva>cjta>v ecrrcocrav eKaTOV eTepoi. tovtovs Se eXBovTas (jyrjpl 
heZv els TTJV KaivrjV ttoXlv crvveTnpbeXrjOrjvai ottcos at Te dp^ol 

d KaTaaTcJooLV /caret v6p,ovs, KaTaaTacrai Te So/ct/xacr^cDcrt* ye- 
vopLevojv Se tovtojv, ttjv p,ev K.vcogov tovs Kvojglovs olKeXv, 
TTjV Se veav ttoXlv avTr)v avTrjv Treipdadai acp^ecv Te Kal 
evTVX^Z^- ol Se Sr) yevopLevoi tojv errTa Kal rpta/covra vvv 

5 re /cat els tov eVetra avpLTravTa xpdvov eirl ToTaSe rjpiXv rjp-q- 
adojaav npcoTov puev ^vXaKes eoTCuaav tojv vopLOJV, eVetra 
TOJV ypa/x/xarcov (Lv dv eKaoTOs dnoypdiprj tols dp^ovai to 
ttXtjOos TTJs avTCov ovoLas, ttXtjv 6 puev pueyLOTOv TupirjpLa 

e e;^ajv TeTTdpojv puvcov, 6 Se to SevTepov Tpccov, 6 Se TptTOs 
SvoXv pLvaZv, puvas Se 6 TeTapTOS. edv Se tls eTepov ^at- 
viqTai Tt 77-apa ra yeypapipieva KeKTTjpLevoSy SrjpLoacov puev 
ecTTOj TO TOLovTov diTav, TTpos TOVTO) Se Slktjv vvex^TOj T(^ 

164 



NOMftN r 754 e 

povXofievw fji€rt€vai firj KaXr)v /xiyS' evMVVfiov dXX ato';^/oav, 5 
iav dXLGKr)TaL 8ta to KepSos rcbv vofiojv Karacfypovajv . at- 
(JXpoKepSelas ovv avrov ypaipdjx^vos 6 ^ovXrjOels €7Te^irio 
rfj Slkt] €v avTols toIs vopLO^vXa^LV edv S' o ^evyojv 6(f)Xrj, 
rcjv KOLVCJV KTrjpLdrajv purj fxerex^TOJ, SiavofJir] Se orav rfj 755 
TToXei yiyvr^rai ns, dfjLOipo^ earco ttXtJv ye rod kXtjpov, 
y€ypd(l>6aj Se d)<f>XrjKa)g, ecos dv l^fj, ottov ttols d ^ovX6pi€vos 
avrd dvayviouerai. pirj irXiov 8e e'lKOOLV ircov vopLO<f)vXa^ 
dpxerojy (fyepdadcx) S* els rrjv dpx^jv pir] eXarrov 7) Trevrrj- 5 
Kovra yeyovojs ercbv e^rjKovrovrrjs Se evex^^i'S Se/ca piovov 
dpxero) errjy /cat /caret rovrov rov Xoyov, ottcds dv ns TrXeov 
vnep^ds [e^SopirjKOVTa] ^fj. {jirfKeTi ev tovtols rols dpxovGL b 
TTjv TrjXLKavT7]v dpx^jv (Ls dp^ojv hiavoy]6rjTO) ,^ 

To, piev ovv irepl tojv vopiO(f>vXdKCJV ravra elprjaBco TrpoG- 
rdypuara rpCa, rrpo'CovTCov he els TOvp,TTpoode rcov vSpbwv 
eKaaros Trpoard^ei rovrots rots dvSpdaiV Svnviov avrovs 5 
SeX TTpos TOLS vvv elpr]pLevoLs TTpoGeTnpLeXeZaOai' vvv S' ^^^S" 
dXXcjov dpxojv alpecrews irepL Xeyotpbev dv. Set yap Srj rd 
pierd ravra arpar7]yovs alpeiodai, /cat rovrois els tov tto- 
XepLov olov rivas VTrrjpealas LTTTrdpxovs /cat <j)vXdpxovs Kai c 
ra)v TTe^ojv (f)vXdjv Koapirjrds rcov rd^ecov, ols Trpeirov dv e'lr] 
rovr* avro rovvopua /xaAtcrra, otov /cat ol ttoXXoI ra^idpxovs 
avrovs eTrovopidi^ovGL. rovrcov Srj arparrjyovs p^ev e^ avrrjs 
TT]s 7T6Xea>s ravrrjs ol vopLO(f>vXaKes Trpo^aXXeadcxJv , atpet- 5 
(jdojv S e/c rctJv tt po^Xr]6evr ojv irdvres ol rov TToXepLOV kolvoj- 
vol yevopievoL re ev rals rjXiKLais /cat yuyvopievoL eKaarore. 
eav Se rts dpa Soktj rivi rcov purj 7Tpo^e^X7]pLevcov dpuetvcov 
elvai rcov Trpo^Xrjdevrwv rtvos, errovop^daas dvd^ drov dvrwa d 
TTpo^dXXerai, rovr^ avro opuvvs dvmTpo^aXXeadco rov erepov 
OTTorepos S' dv So^tj SiaxeiporovovpLevos, els rrjv alpeaw 
iyKpLveaOco. rpels Se, ols dv r) TrXelarrj p^etporovta yiyvq- 
rat, rovrovs elvai arparrjyovs re /cat eTnpieXrjrds rcov Kara 5 
TToXepLov, SoKLpLaadevrcov Kaddirep ol vopLO(/)vXaKes' ra^idp- 
Xovs Se avroiai Trpo^dXXeadai puev rovs alpeSevras orpa- 
rrjyovs ScoSe/ca, eKdarrj <j)vXfj ra^capxov, rrjv S' dvmrpo- e 
^oXrjv elvaiy Kaddnep rcov arparr^ycov eyiyvero rrjv avrrjv 
/cat Trept rcov ra^uapx^JV, /cat rrjv emx^iporovLav /cat rrjv 
KpLUiv, rov Se avXXoyov rovrov ev rep rrapovri, irpiv rrpv- 
raveis re /cat ^ovXrjv fjprjodaL, rovs vopuocpvXaKas avXXe- 5 

165 



55 e nAAT12N02 

^avras ^Is x^ptov ws lepcJjrarov t€ koI tKavcoTarov KaduaaL, 

X<^pf'S fi€V rovs oirXiras, X^P''^ ^^ tovs imreas, rpirov 8* 

icjye^rjs tovtois irdv oaov ifjunoXefiiov ;(etpoTOvowT6ui' Se 

arparrjyovs fxkv [/cat Ittttolpxovs] Trdvres, ra^idp^ovs 8e ol 

756 TTjv ac777tSa TidefievoL, (f)vXdpxovs Se auxoi^ Trdv to ltt- 

TTLKov aipeLado), ^lXcov hk 7) ro^orcov yj rivos dXXov rcov 

ejJLTToXejjLLWV rjyefJLOvas ol arparrjyol iavrols Kadicrrdvrcxjv. 

LTTTTapxojv Srj Kardaraais dv tj/xlv ert Xoltttj ylyvoiro. rov- 

5 Tovs ovv Trpo^aXXeadojv {xkv olrrep /cat rovs crpanqyovs 

^ Trpov^dXXovrOy ttjv Se alpeoLv /cat Tr^v dvTL<7rpo >PoXr)v rov- 

* Tojv TTjv avTTjv yiyveodaL Kaddnep rj tcov Grparrjyojv iyiyverOy 

b X^'-P^'''^^^^'^^ ^^ '^^ LTTTTLKOV aVTOVS ivaVTlOV OpWVTCOV TCOV 

7r€L,ajv, Svo 8e ols dv TrXeiorrj x^^poTovla yiyvrjraiy rovrovs 
rjyejxovas elvai, Travrcov rcov iTTTTevovrayv . rds 8e a/x^tajSi^- 
TTycretS" Tcjv x^^porovLwv J^expt Svolv etvaf to Se rpirov idv 

5 afjLcfycu^Tjrfj res, Siai/jrjcjil^ecjdaL rovroxjq olarrep rrjs x^^P^~ 
rovias fjierpov eKdaroLS eKaarov rjv. 

BovXrjv Se elvai fiev rpiaKOvra ScoSe/caSas" — e^rjKovra 8e 
/cat rpiaKoaioL yiyvoivro dv TrpeTTOvres rals hiavojiaZs — P'^p'^ 

C 8e hiaveipLavras rerrapa [/caTa evevrjKovra rov dpidjjLov] rov- 
rojv i^ €Kdarov rcov npirjixdrajv (j)€p€iv ivev^Kovra ^ovXevrdg. 
TTpcorov fJL€v eK rcov fjueyicrrcov ripLT^fJidrcov diravras (f)ip€LV i^ 
dvdyK7]£, rj t,rjixiovo6ai, rov fxrj TTeidopLevov rfj So^dar^ ^rjfjiLa' 

5 €7T€LSdv S' ivexOcocTL, rovrovs piev KaraarjpL'qvaGdaL, rfj Se 
varepata (jyipeiv e/c ra)v Bevrepcov npLrjpudrcov Kara ravra 
Kaddirep rfj Trpoodev, rpirr] 8' €/c rcov rptrcov rifMrjp^drcov 
<f)€p€Lv fiev rov ^ovXopievov, eTrdvayKes 3e etvat TOts" rcov 

d rpLcov ripLrjpidrcov, ro Se rdraprov re Teal apuKporarov iXev- 
Oepov d(f)€LadaL rijs ^r^pblas, 09 dv avrcov p,rj ^ovXrjrai (fyepecv. 
rerdprrj 8e (j)€p€LV puev e/c rod rerdprov /cat (jpuKpordrov 
TtjLtrJ/xaTos" diravras, d^'qpLLOv S* ctvat rov c/c rov rerdprov 

5 /cat rpirov rcpLijixaros, idv eveyKelv p^rj ^ovX-qrai' rov 8 e/c 
rov hevrepov /cat npcorov pL-q <f)epovra l,rj paovad at, rov puev 

e e/c rov hevrepov rpiTrXaaia rrjs TTpcorrjs Iprjpiias, rov 8 e/c 
rov TTpcorov rerpaTrXao-la. rrepLTrrrj 8e rjpLepa rd Kara- 
arjpLavdevra ovopuara e^eveyKelv pLev rovs dpxovras ISelv 
TTCtCTt TotS" TToXiraiSy <f>epeLV 8' e/c rovrcov av rrdvra dvSpa rj 

5 ^rjpLLOvadaL rfj rrpcorr) l^rjpbla' oyBo-^KOvra 8e /cat eKarov e/cAe- 
^avras dij)^ eKdarcov rcov rLpLr^pidrcoVy rovs rjpLicreis rovrcov 

166 



N0M12N r 756 e 

diTOKXrjpa)aavrag hoKiyLaaai, tovtovs 8' etvat tov evtavrov 
jSovAeuTas". 

'H /X€V atpecTts' ovrco ytyvofxivr) fieaov dv e;\;ot fiovapxi'Krjs 
Kol SrjfjLOKparLKTJg TroAtrctas", ^S" aet SeX {xeaeveLv rrjv TroXtrecav • 10 
SovXoL yap dv /cat SeairoraL ovk dv TTore yevotvro <f>iXoL, ovhk 757 
€v teats' Tt/iats" ScayopevofJievoi <f)avXot, /cat crTTouSatot — rots' 
ya/3 dp'taots' ra tea ai^tcra ytyvotr' ap', €t fir) rvyxo.voi rod 
fjidrpov — 8ta yap dpicfyorepa ravra ardueajv at TroAtretat 
TrXrjpovvTai. TraAatos" yap Xoyos dXrjd-qs cov, ws Icrorrjg (f)iXo- 5 
rrjra dTrepydt^eraiy fjbdXa /xev 6p6a>£ etpi^rat /cat e/x/xeAcos" "J?- 

TLS 8' CCTTt TTOre LGOTTJS T] TOVTO aVTO SvvapL€Vr} , Sid TO fJLT] 

a(f)6Spa aa<f>rjs etvat a(f)6Spa rjpLas SLarapdrreL. Svotv ydp D 
LGOTrJTOLv ovaaiv, ofjLOJVVfjLoiv {JLev, €pyoj Se ets" ttoAAo, crx^^^^ 
ivavTiaiV, rrjv fiev irepav €ts" rds Tijids Trdoa ttoXls LKavr] 
TTapayayeiv /cat Tras" vofjLoderrjs, rrjv /JLerpcp larjv /cat Gradfjuw 
/cat dpidfio), KXrjpcp direvOvvcov els rds Siavofjuas avrrjv ttjv 5 
8e dXT^deGrdrrjv /cat dpLGrrjv lororrjra ovk€tl pdStev Travri 

ISelv. AtO? ydp StJ KpLGLS eGTly /cat rot? dvdpOJTTOLS CL€i 
GfJLLKpd fJL€V €7TapK€L, TTOLV 8e OOOV dv iTTapKeGT) TToAeCTtV 7] 

/cat tStcuratS", irdvr* dyadd dTrepyd^erai' rep piev ydp p^el^ovL C 
TrAetco, TOJ 8* iXdrrovL afXLKporepa vefxev, p^erpia hihovaa 
Ttpos TTJV avrojv <f)VGLV iKarepcpf /cat Br] /cat ripbds fieit^oGi 
/x€V TTpos dperrjv del /xct^ous", Tot? 8e rovvavriov e^ovGiv 
dperrjs re /cat 77at8€tas" to Trpeirov ^doxoTe dTTOvefiet Kara 5 
Adyov. eo-rtv ya/3 8177701; /cat rd TroAtrt/cdv i^/^tv aet tout 
auTO TO 8t/catov ou /cat vw i^/xas" 6peyop,evovs Bel /cat Trpos" 
TavTTjv Trjv LGorrjTa, oj KAetvta, diro^XeirovTas , ttjv vvv 
(f>voiJLevrjv KaroLKL^eiv ttoXlv. dXXrjv re dv rrore Tts" olkl^t], d 
Trpds" TauTov TOUTO GKOTTOVpuevov XP^^^ vofioBerelv, dXX ov 
TTpds oXiyovs Tvpdwovs r] irpos eva 7] /cat Kpdros Br^piov Tt, 
TT/DO? be TO OLKaiov act, TOUTO o ccTt TO vvvoTj Aex"^^, TO 
/caTCL (f)VGLv LGov dvLGois cKdGTOTe Bodev dvayKalov ye jjltjv 5 
/cat Toi^ot? TTapojwiJLLOLGL TTOTe TTpoGXp'^iGaGdai TToXiv diTa- 
GaVy el /LtcAAct Grdoecjv eavTrj pLT) TrpoGKOLVcjvrjGeiv /cara 
Tt pLepos — TO ydp eVtet/ccs" /cat GvyyvwpLov tov TeXeov /cat e 
dKpL^ovs Trapd Blktjv ttjv opOiqv €Gtlv TrapaTeOpavpievov, 
OTav ylyvrjTaL — 8td to) tov KXr^pov lgo) dvdyKrj irpoGXpr]- 
GaGdai BvGKoXias tcov ttoXXcov eveKa, dedv /cat dyaOrjv tvx'^v 
/cat t6t€ ev cup^ats" eiriKoXovpievovs diropOovv avTOVs tov 5 

167 



57 e nAAT12N02 

KArjpov irpos to SiKaLorarov, ovtoj Srj ^prjGreov avayKaiojs 
758 />t€V Tolv laorrjTOiv a/x^otv, (1)£ 8* on /xaAtcrra eV oXiyioTOis 
rfj irepa, rfj rrjs rvxyjs Seofievr). 

Tavra ovtcjs St-a ravra, cL (f>iXoLy avayKolov rrjv ju-eAAou- 
aav acp^eadai Spdv ttoXlv iTTeiSrj 8e vavs re iv daXdrrrj 
5 TrXeovaa (f)vXaKrjs rjp^ipas Setrat /cat vu/cro? <x€t, ttoXls re 
cbaavTCos iv kXvSojvl tcov dXXojv noXecov Siayofxevr] Kal 
TTavroSaTTaLcnv eTTi^ovXals oIk€l KivSwevovcra dXiaKeadai, 
Set 87) hi rjjxipas re els vvKra Kal €k vvktos avvaTrreLV irpos 
b rjiJLepav dp^ovras dp^ovauv, ^povpovvrds re ^povpovoLV 8ta- 
* 8€)(oiJL€VOVs del Kal TrapaSiSovrag fjbrjSeTTore Xrjyeiv. TrXrjdos 
he ov hvvarov 6^ea>s ovheTTore ovhev rovrcou TTpdrreLV, dva- 
yKalov he rovs fiev ttoXXovs tcJjv ^ovXevrdjv enl rov TrXelarov 
5 rov )(p6vov edv errl rots avrcjv IhioLOL fxevovras evdrjjxoveZ- 
(jdai rd Kara rds avrdJv oiKifjoeLS, ro he hioheKarov fxepos 
avrojv eirl hcoheKa ixrjvas veipiavras, ev ecf)^ evl 7Tapex€LV av- 
C rov£ <f)vXaKas iovri re rivi iroOev dXXoOev elre Kal e^ avrrjs 
rrjs TToXeojs eroifxoj? e7Tirv)(eZvy dv re dyyeXXeiv ^ovXrjraL ng 
eav r av TTVvddveudai n rwv wv TTpoGrjKei TToXet Trpog TToXets 
dXXag dTTOKpiveodai re, Kal epwrijaaaav erepas, drrohe^aodai 
5 ras aTTOKpioeis, Kal hrj Kal rcbv Kara ttoXiv eKdarore vea>- 
repiapidjv eveKa Travrohanajv elojdorcjv del yiyveodaiy ottojs 
d dv /xaAtcrra fxev fxr) ylyvcovraL, yevofievcov he, on rdx^-crra 
aLodofJLevrjg rrjg TroAecos" ladfj ro yevofxevov 61* a ctuAAoycov 
re ael heX rovro elvac ro rrpoKadrjixevov rrjs rroXecos Kvpiov 
Kai hiaXvcrecov, rcov re /card vofxovs rdJv re e^ai<j)vr]s Trpoa- 
2 TTLTTrovddjv rfj TToXet. ravra fxev ovv Trdvra ro ha>heKarov 
dv fiepos rrjs ^ovXrjs eurj ro hiaKoapiovv, rd evheKa dva- 
TTavofxevov rov eviavrov fJieprj' Koivfj he jxerd rojv dXXcjv 
apxojv heZ rds (f)vXaKds ravras (f)vXdrreiv /card ttoXlv rovro 
ro jJLopiov rrjs ^ovXijs del. 
10 Kat rd fiev Kard ttoXlv ovrcos e^ovra fierptcos dv eir) 
e hiarerayfjieva' rrjs he dXX-qs x^P^^ Trdarjs ris eVt/xeAeta 
Kal ris rd^Ls; dpa ovx rjviKa Trdora fiev r) ttoXls, crvpuTraaa 
he rj X^P^ Kard hcoheKa fxeprj hiavevefxr^raiy rrjs rroXecos 
avrijs 6ha)v Kal oiKT^creajv Kal OLKohopucov Kal Xi/juevajv Kal 
5 ay o pas Kal KprjvdJv, Kal hr) Kal refjievwv Kal lepcov Kal rrdv- 
rcov rcov roiovrwv, eTnpLeXrjrds hel nvas diroheheiyixevovs 
elvai; 

168 



NOMi^N r 758 e 

KA. ncos" yap ov; 

A0. Aeycvfjuev St) rotS" /xcp' lepois veojKopovg re arat 759 
Upeas /cat Upecas Selv yiyveadai' ohcjv he koI olKohopaajv 
Koi Koa/jLov rod irepl ra rotavra, dvdpcoTTOJv re, Iva fir] aSc- 
KCOGLV, /cat rcov dXXcov drjpiojv, iv avrcp re ro) rrjs TToXecos 
TTepc^oXcp /cat Trpoaoreicp ottcjjs dv rd TrpoarjKOVTa TToXeoLV 5 
yLyvrjrat, eXeoOat Sel Tpia puev dpxdvrcjv e'lSTj, Trepl fiev ro 
vvvSt] X€)(d€v darvvofjiovg irrovopLdt^ovra^ to 8e Trepi dyopds 
Kodfiov dyopavofJLOvs. UpcJov he lepeag, ols piiu etcnv TrdrpiaL, 
UpojGvvaL /cat ats", pur) KiveZv el Se, otov to TrpcoTOV /carot- b 
/ct^o/xeVots" ct/cos" yiyveudat Trepl ra rotaura, r^ pur^SevL rj tlgiv 
oAtyots", olg pirj KadeGTrjKOL KaTaaTaTeov lepeas re /cat lepeias 
vecoKopovs yiyveodai toZs OeoXs. tovtojv Srj TrdvTCov ra p^ev 
alpeTa XPV' '^^ ^^ KXr)pa>Td ev rat? /caraCTraCTecrt yiyveadat, 5 
pLeiyvvvTas npog (f)iXiav aAAT^Aots* SrjpLOV /cat pbrj SrjpLOV ev 
eKaaTT] X^P^- '^^^ TroXei, ottojs dv ^aAtcrra opLOvduiv elr]. ra 
pLev ovv TcJbv lepecov, to) dew eTTLTpeiTOVTa avTco to Kex^pi- 
upievov yiyveadai, KXrjpovv ovtco ttj deia tvxJ] aTToStSovra, c 
SoKLpid^eLV Se tov del XayxdvovTa TrpdjTOV puev oXoKXrjpov 
/cat yvijaLOV, eVetra (hs otl /xaAtara e/c Kadapevovawv olkt)- 
aecoVy <j)6vov he dyvov /cat TrdvTOJV twv Trepl ra rotaura els 
ra ^eta dpiapTavopLevcov avTov /cat naTepa /cat purjTepa /cara 5 
TavTa ^e^iojKOTas . €/c A.eX(f)djv he xP'h ^opuovg irepl ra ^eta 
TTavTa KopLLGapLevovs /cat KaTaGTiqGavTas eir* avTOis e^rjyr^Tdsy 
TOVToig XPV^^^'" '^ctr' eviavTOV he elvai /cat /xt) pLaKpoTepov d 
TT^i' lepa)Gvv7]v eKdGTTjv, eTT] he pur) eXaTTov e^rjKovTa rjpLLV 
etT^ yeyovdjs 6 pieXXoyv Kad* lepovg vopuovs Trepl ra ^eta LKavcjs 
ayiGTevGeiV raurd Se /cat Trepl tcov lepeiajv eGTCo ra vopLLpua. 
Tovs he e^rjyrjTas Tpls <f>epeTcoGav p.ev at TeTTapes <j)vXal 5 
TeTTapaSj CKaGTOv e^ avTcJov, TpeZs Se, ols dv TrXeiGTrj ye- 
VTjTai iprj(f)os, hoKLpidGavTas y evvea TrepbTreLV ets" AeX<^ovs 
aveXelv e^ eKdGTTjs Tpidhos eva' ttjv he hoKipuaGiav avTcov 
/cat TOV xpdvov ttjv r^XiKiav etvat Kaddnep tcov lepecov. ovtol e 
Se eGTOJv e^rjyrjTal hid ^iov tov he ye XiTTOVTa TTpoaipei- 
GdcoGav at TeTTapes (f>vXal ddev dv eKXiTrrj. ra/xtas" re hrf 
TCOV re Lepojv XP'^P'^'^^^ e/caarots" rots' lepoZs /cat Tepuevcov 
/cat KapTTcov tovtcov /cat puGdcoGecov Kvpiovs aipelGdai piev ^ 
€K TCOV pueycGTCOv Tip^rfpidTCOv Tpels els rd /xeytara lepd, hvo 750 
S ets" Td GpLLKpoTepa, Tvpos he Td e/z-jLteAearara eVa* Trfv he 

169 



6o a nAAT12N02 

aupecriv tovtwv /cat rrjv 8o/c t/xacrtav yiyveodai Kadamep rj 
Tojv arpar'qycjv iyiyvero, /cat ra jxkv av Trepl ra lepa ravra 

5 yiyveada) . 

^A(f)povprjTov Se Srj fxrjSev cts" SvvafjiLV earoj. rroXeajs jJi^v 
ovv at (fypovpal irepi ravrrj yiyvicrdcocrav, arpaTqycov iiTL- 
fieXovfievcov /cat ra^Lap^aJv /cat LTnrdpxojv /cat <f)vXdpx(JOV /cat 

b TrpvravecoVy /cat St) /cat darvvo/JLCov /cat dyopav6p,(x)Vy oirorav 
alpedevres rjjxlv Karaarcjaiv nves CKavaJS' Tr]V Se (xAAt^i^ 
Xcopav (jyvXdrreiv irdaav Kara rdSe. Sc68e/ca /xev T^/Atv rj 
X^P^ TTctCTa ets" Suva/xtv taa jxopia vevifi'qrai, cf)vXrj Se jLtta 
*• 5 TO) pLopicp eKaarcp eTTLKXrjpcodeiGra [/car evtafroj/] Trapex^roj 
7T€vr€ olov aypovopLOvs re /cat (f)povpdpxov£, rovrois 3' ccrrco 
KaraXe^aoOai rrj^ avrcov (f)vXrjs c/cacrroj ScoSc/ca rcov Trivre 

C e/c rail/ vdcov, (jltj eXarrov tj irevre /cat eiKoaiv errj yeyovoras, 
pLTj TrXelov Se ?) rpidKovra. rovrots Se SiaKXiqpojd'qrco ra 
fiopia rrjs p^copas" Kara fjLrjva e/cacrra eKdarois, ottcos av Trdarjs 
TTJs x^P^S epiTTeipoi re /cat eTTiGrrnxoves yiyvcovrat, Trdvres. 

5 Suo S' er?^ rrjv apx^jv /cat ri^v <f)povpdv yiyveadai (jypovpoZs 
re /cat dpxovaiv. ottcos 8' av to irpcjrov Xdx^JGLV ra P'eprjy 
[Toys' TTJs x^P^^ roTTOvs, ] jxeraXXdrrovras del rov e^rjs roirov 

d eKdarov pirjvos rfyelGBai rovs ^povpdpxovs errl Se^ta kvkXo)' 
ro o em oegta yiyveooco ro irpos eco. TrepieAuovros oe rov 
evLavrov, rep Sevrepcp erei, Iva ojs TrXeZaroL rcov (jypovpayv fxr] 
fiovov e/x7ret/3ot rrjs x^P^^ ytyvwvrai Kara pLiav wpav rod 

5 eviavroVy rrpos rfj X^P9- ^^ ^P'^ '^^^ "^V^ copas eKaarr^g rrepi 
eKacrrov rov rorrov ro ycyvo/jLevov cos irXeZaroi KarapbdOcooLV, 
ol rore r]yovp.evoL irdXiv dcjiiqyeiodcjGav els rov evcovvjjiov 

e a€t piera^dXXovres rorrov, ecus av ro Sevrepov Sce^eXOcoaiV 
eros' rip rpirco Se dXXovs dypovofiovs alpeluO ai /cat cfypov- 
pdpxovs [rovs TTevre rcov ScoSeKa eTnpieXrjrds] . ev Se Sr) rals 
hiarpi^als rep roircp eKdarcp rr]v einpLeXeiav elvai roidvhe 

5 rivd' TTpcbrov p.ev OTTCOS evepKTjs r] x^P<^ '^po9 rovs TToXep^LOVs 
on p,dXiGra earai, ra<f)pevovrds re oaa av rovrov Ser] /cat 
aTTOCKdrrrovras /cat evoLKo8opL'qp,aGLv els Svvapbiv eipyovras 
rovs eTTixecpovvras orLOVv rrjv x^P^^ ^^^^ '^^ Kri^pLara /ca- 
KOVpyeZvy ;\;pajp-eVoi;s' 8' VTTol,vyiois /cat Tots" olKerais roZs ev 
761 Tcp roTTCp eKdarcp TTpos ravra, 8t' eKeivcov TTOLOvvras, eKeivoLS 
eTTLcrrarovvras, rcov olKelcov epycov avrcov apyias on pLaXtcrra 
eKXeyopuevovs . Sva^ara Be Sr) rrdvra rroieZv fxev TOt? ex^poZs, 

170 



NOMfiN r 761 a 

rots' Se ^tAots" on fidXcara ev^ara, dvOpcoTTOLg re /cat vtto- 
^vytOLs /cat ^oaKruxaGiv, ohcjv re iTnfieXovfievovs ottcos (hs 5 
rjjjiepcjOTaTaL e/cacrTat ytyvcuvrat, /cat rcDv €/c Atos" vSarcov, 
Iva TTjv ■)(^(xipav fiTj KaKovpyfjy fiaXXov S ajcf>eXfj peovra e/c 
TCx)v vipTjXcov ets" ras" iv rots' opeai voLTras ooai /cotAat, ras' b 
€Kpoas avrcJov etpyovras olKohopbrjixaai re /cat racfipev/jbaGLV, 
OTTOJS o-v ra napa rod Alos vSara KaraSexofievai /cat 7Tt- 
vovaaiy rots' VTTOKarojdev arypoZs re /cat tottol^ TrdcjLV vafiara 
/cat Kprjvas Trotoucrat, /cat rows' avxP'iripordrovs tottovs ttoXv- 5 
vSpovg T€ /cat euwS/jous' aTrepya^covrat • ra re Trrjyala vSara, 
idv re rts" TTorafjLos idv re /cat Kpitjvrj fj, KOGfjLowres (j^vrevpLaGi 
re /cat OLKoSofjbijfjLaGLV evTrpeTrearepa, /cat Gvvdyovres /xeraA- c 
Aetats' vdfiara, rrdvra dcf)dova TTOicoaiVy vSpelais re /ca^ 
eKdaras rds cjpas, et rt ttou aAoros" 7} ripievos Trepl ravra 
dv€Lpb€vov [fj], rd pevpuara a^teVres' ets" aura ra rcDv ^ecDi^ 
tepa, KoorpbojcTL. Travraxfj 8e ev rots' rotourots' yvpbvaona XP"^ 5 
/caraCT/ceua^etv roi)s" veovs avrols re /cat rots' yepovorc, yepov- 
rt/ca XpvTpd [deppud] Trapexovrag, vXtjv irapaTidevras avrjv 
/cat ^Tjpdv d(f)dovov, eir* dvrjGei Kapuvovrcov re voaots' /cat u 
Trdvots' T€TpvpL€va yecopyLKOLS awpbara Sexopievovs evpcevcos, 
larpov Se^iv pirj irdw ao(f)ov ^eXriova avxvf^- 

Tavra puev ovv /cat ra roiavra ndvra Koapios re /cat cZ>(/>eAta 
rots' roTTOis yiyvoLT dv puerd TratStas' ovSapufj dxcipirov 5 
GTTOvSr) 8e 77ept ravra T^Se earco. rolls' i^'qKovra eKdarovg rov 
avrwv roTTOv <f)vXdrreiv , purj pLovov TToXepbiojv €V€Ka aXXd /cat 
rcDv <j)iXajv (jyaGKpvrcjv elvai' yeirovcov 8e /cat rwv dXXcov 
TToXtrajv T]v dXXos dXXov dSt/c^, SouAos' 7] iXevOepoSy St/ca^ovras' e 
rep dSt/cetcr^at <j)dGKOvri, rd pL€v apuKpd avrovg rovg 7T€vre dp- 
XovraSi rd Se /xet^ova pierd rchv 8aj8e/ca [rou? eTrra/catSe/ca] 
8t/cd^etv P'^xp'' 'rpicjv pivcjVy oaa dv erepos erepcp iTTLKaXfj. 
SiKaarrjv he /cat dpxovra dwrrevdwov ovSeva 8t/cd^eti/ /cat 5 
dpx€Lv 8et ttAt^i/ rcDv ro reXos evrtrt^eVrcov otov ^actiXitov 
/cat 817 /cat rows' dypovopiovs rovrovs, idv v^pl[,co(JL rt 7re/3t 
rows' c5v €77 LpLeXovvr at, TTpOGrd^eis re TTpoardrrovres dviaovs, 
/cat €7nx€ipovvr€s Xapi^dveLV re /cat (f)€p€iv rcJbv iv rats' 762 
yecopylais p^r) Treiaavreg , /cat edi' Se^covrat rt /coAa/ceta? 
eVe/ca 8t8ovrct>v, 7) [/cat St/ca?] d8t/C6i>s' hiavipicoai, raZs /xev 
dojireiais vireiKovres dvetSry ^epecrOojcrav iv Trdcrr) rfj TroAet, 
roil' 8e dAAoiv dSLKrjpLarojv on dv d8t/ccDo't rows' ev ra) roTTOJ, 5 

171 



l(i2 a nAATi2N02 

rCiv fJLexpi' /i'Vas iv rots' KCjOfJUT^raig Kal yeiroaiv VTrex^TCoaav 
eKovres St/ca?, rwv 8e /jL€l^6vojv eKaaTore ahiKruxdrcxjv tj kol 

b Tibv iXarrovcov, iav fxr] ^deXojGLV virix^^^) Tnurevovres rco 
/jLediGraadaL Kara fjirjvas et? erepov det tottov (f)€vyovT€s 
OLTTOcfyev^eLadaL, tovtcov Trept Aay;^d^'et^' fjiev iv ralg kolvols 
hiKats Tov dSLKOvjjievov, edv 8' eAi^, rr^v StTrAacrtav TTparriadoj 

5 TOV V7TO<j)€vyovTa Kal pirj ideXiqoavTa V7Toa)(€iv eKovra tl/jlcjo- 
piav. hiaiTaGOojv Se o'i re dpxovreg ot r^ dypovopioi rd 
hvo errj roLovSe rivd rpoTrov Trpwrov jxev Srj Kad* eKdarovs 

C Toifs TOTTOvs elvai crucrcrtTta, iv ols Koivfj rrjv Statrav ttoltj- 
reov aTTaoLV o he aTToavGGirriGa? Kav rjvrtvaovv rjixepav, i) 
vvKra aTTOKOiixiqdeis y fxr] rajv dp^ovrcov ra^dvrajv rj TrdGrjs 
Tivos dvdyKTjs €m7TeGovGr]s , idv drrocfyiQvojGLV avrov ol Trevre, 

5 Kal ypdipavres Oojglv ev dyopa KaraXeXvKora rrjv (J>povpdv, 
ovecSr] re ix^Tco rrjv TToXireiav ws TrpoSuSovs to eavTOV 
lJL€po£y KoXa^€G9oj T€ TrXr^yals vtto tov GVVTvyxdvovTOs kol 

d eOiXovTOs KoXd^€LV dTLfXioprjTOJS. Tcov Se dpxdvTCov a^ idv 
Tts" TL Spa TOLOVTOV avTos , emixeXeiGOai fxkv tov tolovtov 
TrdvTas Tovs i^rjKOVTa xp^^^t o Sk aLGdofJuevos re Kal ttvOo- 
fievog fjLT] ine^Lajv ev toIs avTols evex^orOco vopiois Kal 

5 TrXeiovi tcov vecov ^rjfjLLOVGdco' Tvepl rds" twv vecov dpxds 
rjTijJiOiGOco rraGas. tovtcov he ol vopio^vXaKes eTTiGKOTTOL 
aKpi^els eGTCOGav, ottcos t^ fJLrj yiyvrjTai ttjv dpx^jv ^ yiyvo- 

e \ieva TTJs d^tag Slktjs Tvyxdvrj. Set hrf ttovt* dvhpa Sta- 
voeiGdai TTepl diravTcov dvOpwTTWv cos d fjurj SovXevGas ovS 
dv SeGTTOTrjs yevoiTO d^Los eiraivoVy Kal KaXXcoTTL^eGOai XP'^ 
Tcp KaXcos SovXevGac pidXXov tj tco KaXojs dp^ac, TvpwTOV 

5 puev TOLs vopLois, (Ls TavTiqv toZs deols ovGav hovXeiav, 
eireiT aei toZs irpeG^VTepoLS re /cat evTifxajs ^e^ccoKOGi 
TOVS veovg. jxerd he TavTa ttjs Kad* '^fxepav hiaLTTjs heX ttjs 
TaTTeivrjs Kal airopov yeyevfJLevov elvai rd hvo eTT) raura tov 
Twv dypovopuajv yeyovoTa. errethdv ydp hrj KaraXeyajGiv ol 

lo hcvheKa, GVveXOovTes fierd tcov irevTe, ^ovXeveGdcoGav cos 

763 olovrrep OLKeTac ovx e^ovGLV avTols dXXovs ot/c eras' re /cat 

hovXovs, ovh^ €K TCOV d?^cov yecopycov re /cat KcofJLTjTOJV rots' 

eK€ivcov eirl rd t8ta xPV^ovTat VTrrjpeTT^jjiaTa Sta/covots', ciAAa 

piovov oGa els Td hrjpLOGLa, ra S* aAAa avToi St ai5ra>v 

5 hiavorjOrjTiOGav cos ^LCOGo/juevoL hiaKovovvTes re /cat hiaKovov- 
fievoi [eayrots"] — npos he tovtols iraGav ttjv x^p^^ hie^epev- 

172 



N0M12N ^ 763 a 

Vio/uLevoL dipovs /cat -x^eLixcbvos cruv rols ottXols (f>vXaK7J£ re 
/cat yvcopiaecos kv€Ka Travrojv act tcjv tottcov. klv8vv€V€l b 
yap ovSevos eXarrov jjiddrjfjia elvai St* a/cpt^Setas" eTrtWacr^at 
iravras r-qv avrcjv x^P^^' ov Srj X^P^^ KVvrjyeGca /cat tt^v 
dXXrjv drjpav ovx tjttov eVtrT^Sewetv Set rov 'q^covra r) r^s" 
aAA-j^S" TjSovi^s a/xa /cat co^eAta? r^S" Trept ra roiavra yiyvo- 5 
jjL€V7]^ TTdcnv. TovTOVs ovv , avTOV9 T€ /Cat TO cVtTTySeu^a, 
etre rts" KpvTTTOVs €tT€ aypovofiovs €l6* otl KaXojv ;^at/)et, 
TOVTO TTpoaayopevcov , TrpoOvficos nds dvrjp et? Swa/xtv iTTirrj- c 
Severco, ocrot fieXXovau rrjv avrcjjv ttoXiv t/cavcos" craj^eti^. 

To Se /xera tovto dpxovrojv alpecrecDS dyopauofxcov irepi /cat 
aarvvopiixjv nepi •?jv 7y/xtv irropievov. eiroLvro 8' ai^ dypovo- 
pLOLs Y^ aarvvopLOL rpels i^rjKovra ovcrLV, rptxfj ScoSe/ca /xe/oi^ 5 
TT^S" TrdAecos" StaAa^ovres", papLovpbevoL eKeivovs rcov re dSoiv 
eTTipieXovpLevoL rcbv Kara to durv /cat rcuv e/c tt^s" x^P^^ 
X€(jj(j)6pix)v els TTjv TToXiv del rerapievcov /cat rcDi' ot/coSo/xtctiv, 
tP'a /cara vopLOVs yiyvojvraL vracrat, /cat Si^ /cat tcDv uSarcoi^, d 
OTToa av avrois TrepiTTOjai /cat 7ra/3aStScDatv ot ^povpovvres 
redepdrrevpLeva, ottojs els rds Kprjvas t/cava /cat Kadapd tto- 
pevopLeva Koapifj re a/xa /cat d)cf)eXfj rrjv ttoXlv, Set St^ /cat 
TOUTOus" Swarou? re elvat, /cat axoXd^ovras rcov kolvojv em- 5 
pLeXeZodai' Std Trpo^aXXeGdoj piev ttoLs dvrjp e/c rcuv pueyL- 
Grcov ripLrjpidrcov darvvopLov ov dv ^ovXrjrac, ^lax^iporovq- 
devrwv Se /cat d(j)iKopievojv els e^ ots" av TrAetarat ytyycovrat, e 
rovs rpeZs dTTOKXrjpcoadvrcov ols rovrcov evrt/xeAes", So/ct/xa- 
adevres Se dpxovrcov Kara rovs redevras avrois vopuovs. 

^AyopavopLovs S* e^^s" rovrois alpeladaL pLev e/c rcov Sevre- 
pcov /cat TTpojrojv rcpLrjpLarcov irevre, ra S* aAAa aurcDv yiyveadai c 
TT^i^ alpeaiv Kaddirep 7] rwv darvvopuDv [Se/ca rcov a'AAojv 
npoxeiporovTjdevrui^f rovs rrevre dTTOKXrjpojaat, /cat So/ct/xa- 
udevras avrovs dpxovras dTTO(f)rjvai.] ;)^etporo]/etTa> Se Trds* 
Travra* o Se pLrj deXcov, eav elaayyeXdfj irpos rovs dpxovras, 764 
^rjpLLOvadoj TTevrrjKovra Spaxp^OLis irpos rco /ca/cds" etvat SoKeXv, 
trco S ets" eKKXrjatav /cat rov kolvov avXXoyov 6 ^ovXopievos, 
eiravayKes S earoj rep rwv Sevrepwv /cat rrpcorajv rt/xTy/xarcuv, 
Se/ca SpaxpiOLLs ^7]pLLOvpLevcp eav pbrj Trapdjv e^erd^rjrat rots 5 
af AAdyots" rpircp Se rt/xTy/xart /cat to) rerdprco pLrj errdvayKeSy 
aAAa d^T^/xtos" d<j)eiado}, eav pu-q ri rrapayyeiXcjaiv ol dp^ovres 
iraGLv e/c rti/os" dvdyKrjs avvtevaL. rovs Se St) dyopavopuovs b 

173 



64 b nAAT12N02 

Tov 7T€pl TTjv ayopov KocrfjLOV SiaraxOevTa vtto vo/jlwv (jyvXdr- 
reiv, Koi Upcov /cat Kpr^vcov iTTifieXcladaL rcou Kar* dyopdv, 
O7TC0S pLTjSev aSiKTJ //.T^SetS", TOV dSiKovvra Se KoXd^eiv, irXriyaZs 

5 fxkv Koi Secr/JLOLS SovXov Kal ^evov, idv S* ivcxiJOpLO^ wv ris 
irepl rd roiavra dKoorfjifj, fi^xpt P'^v eKarov hpa^pLchv vopii- 
(T/xaros" avTovs elvai Kvpiovs SiaSiKd^ovrag , p-^XP^ ^^ hnrXa- 

C (Jiov rovTov Koivfj pL€Ta aarvvopicov t,rjpLiovv ScKd^ovras rep 
dScKovvTL. ra avrd 8e /cat aarvvopLois ecrrco ^T^jLttco/xara re 
/cat /coAaaets" eV rfj eavrcov dpxj], f^^XP'' H'^^ pivds avrovs 
^r]p,LovvTas, rrjv StTrAacrtW Se pierd dyopavopLCOv. 
^ 5 MovcTLKTJs Se TO p,€Td TOVTO KOI yvpLvaaTLKTJs dpxovTas 
KadLcrraadai irpeiTov dv €L7], Slttovs cKarepcov, rovs p^^v 
TiatSetas" avrrjs eveKa, roifs §€ dycovLGTLKrjs . TratSetas" pi€V 
^ovXeraL Xeyecv 6 vopLos yvpLvaalcov /cat StSacr/caActcop' eVt- 

d pLeXrjrd^ Koapiov /cat TraLSevaecos dp,a /cat rrj^ irepl raura 
eTTt/xeAetas" tojv cfyoLrrjaecov re irepi /cat olKYjoeajv dppiviov 
/cat OrjXeLoyv Kopcov, dycovias Se, eV t€ rots' yvpiviKols /cat 7r€/)t 
TT^p* pLOVGLKTjv ddXoOeras ddXrjraLg, Slttovs clv tovtovs. [irepl 

5 pLOVcnKTjv p,€v erepovSy Trepl dyojviav S' aAAoi;?.] dycovtaTLKrjs 

pL€V OW avdpCJOTTWV T€ Kal ITTTTOJV TOVS CLVTOVS , pLOVGLKTJ^ §€ 

irepovs p^€.v rovs irepl piovcphiav re /cat p,i,p,7]TLK'qv, otov 

e paifjcpSdjv /cat KidapcpScov /cat avXrjrojv Kal Trdvrcjov rdJv tolov- 
rojv ddXodeTas irepovs TrpeiTOV dv eli] yiyveudai, rcov Se 
TTcpl ;^Ojoa)8taj/ aAAous". irpcbrov Srj rrepl ttjv tcDv x^P^^ 
TTaihidv iralScov re /cat dvSpaJv Kal drjXetdJv Kopcov iv dpx'rj- 

5 crecrt /cat r?^ ra^et tt^ dTrdar^ yiyvopi€.vr\yt pLovaiKfj rovs dp- 
XovTas aipeladai ttov xP^^^' Ikovos he els dpx^JV avrols, 
765 P'Tj eXarrov rcTTapdKovTa yeyovojs irwv. LKavos Se /cat irepl 
piovcphiav els, pirj eXarTOV tj rpidKOVTa yeyovcjs ercDr, €tcr- 
aywye-vs re etP'at /cat rots' dpuXXiopiivoLs rrjv hiaKpiGLV 
iKavws diTohihovs. tov Srj x^pdJv dpxovra Kal SLaderrjpa 

5 alpeladai XPV TOCovSe TLvd Tpoirov. daoi puev (f)iXo<f)p6vcos 
ecTX'^KaGL TTepl ra roiavra, els rov avXXoyov trojaav, eTTit^rj- 
pLLOL edv pLTj Lojcnv — rovrov Se ol vopLO(f)vXaKes Kpirai — rots' 
8 aAAots', edv pLTj ^ovXcovrai, pbrjSev endvayKes earco. Kal rrjv 

b TTpo^oXrjv St) rov alpovpievov ck rwv ep,7Teipo}v TTOLrjreov, ev 
re rfj So/ct/xaata KarrjyoprjpLa ev rovr^ earo) Kal dTTrjyoprjpLa, 
rojv p,ev d)s aTTeipos 6 Xax(j^v, rcov 8* ws epLireipos' os 8* 
dv els €K TTpox^tporovrjdevrojv 8e/ca Aa;;^7^ SoKLpuaadels, rov 

174 



XOMfiX r 765 b 

iviavrov rwv xopwv dp\€Tco Kara v6p.ov. Kara ravra hk 5 
Tovrois Kol raxjTTj 6 Xax<hv rov iviavrov ckc'lvov ratv d<f)LKO- 
fMcvojv etV Kpiaiv (xovLohiayv r€ Kal avvavXicov ap\€roj, els 
Tovs Kpiras drroSiSovs 6 Xa^cov rrjv Kpicnv. p.erd hk ravra c 
Xpecbv dycovias ddXoderas alpeiadai. rrjs Tre/Jt rd yvfivaGta 
iTnrcov T€ Kal dvdpwTrcuv e/c rojv rpircjv t€ Kal en rojv Seu- 
ripojv rip.rjpLdriov eiV Se rrjv aipcaiv ecrroj /ikv eTrdvayKes 
roLS rpialv I Kal] rropevcGdai, nfi-qiiacn, ro GfiiKporarov 8e 5 
d^-qp.tov d(f>€LG6co. rpeZs S' earojaav ol XaxovreSt tcov Trpo- 
XCLporovTjdevrcov {jlcv elKoai, Xa\6vrctjv Se €/c rcov eiKoai 
rpiOJVy ov? ay /cat ilrrj<l>09 rj rcov SoKifjLaL,6vrajv SoKL/jidcrr) • idv 
8c Tis" dTroSoKif-iaadfj Kad rjvrivaovv dpxjjg Xij^LV Kal KpiGLVy d 
oAAou? dvOaipe'Ladai Kara raura Kal rr]v SoKifiaalav cuaav- 
rojs avrojv xrcpt TTOieXcrdaL. 

AoiTTOS hk dp\cx)v irepl rd 7rpo€i,p7]iJ.€va T^/xtv o rijg Trai- 
Selas iTrLficXTjrrjs Trdcrqs drjXeiojv re Kal dppevojv. eT? f^kv ^ 
Brj Kal 6 rovrcov dp^cov ecrroj Kara vopLovs, irojv p.kv yeyovdjs 
/lit) eXarrov -^ TrcvxTy/covra, TratScov Sk yvrjGLCov rrarrjp, jxa- 
Xiara /jikv viojv Kal dvyarepcov, et Sk p^-q, ddrepa' SLavo-qd-qrco 
8k avros re o TrpoKpidel? Kal 6 TrpoKpivajv (hs ovaav rarjTr^v g 
rrjv dp-xTjv rcov iv rjj TrdAet dKpordrcov dpx^ov noXv peyicrrrjv. 
navros yap Srj <f>vrov rj Trpcorrj ^Xdarrj KaXcos opprfOelaay 
TTpds apcTTjv rijs avrov (j)vu€OJS KvpLcordrrj riXos iTrtdeXvaL 
ro TzpoaSopov, rcov re dXXcov Svrcov Kal rcov t,cx)Cov rfpepcov c 
Kal dypuov [Kal dv6pco7Tcov]' dvdpcoTTOs Se, d)£ <f)ap€v,-qp€pov, 756 
6p.cos firjv TTaiSelas fikv opdijs rvxdv Kal (l>va€Cos evrv^ovSy 
deiorarov rjpepwrarov re ^wov yiyveadaL (jyiXel, prj LKavcos 
Sk rj prj KaXcos rpachkv dypicorarov, OTToaa (f>vei yrj. (Lv 
€V€Ka ov hevrepov ouSe irdpepyov heZ rrjv TratScov rpo(l)rjv rov r 
vopx>derT]v idv ytyveadaiy irpwrov Se dp^aadai xp^djv rov 
fieXXovra avrcov iTrLpeXrjaeadaL KaXcos alpedfjvaL, rcov iv rjj 
TToXet OS dv dpLoros els Trdvra fj, rovrov Kara Suva^uti^ on 
fidXicrra avrois Kadiardvra npoGrdrreiv i7TLp,eXrjnjv. at 5 
7racra(. roLWV dpxal TrXrjv ^ovXrjs Kal Trpmdvecov els ro rod 
AttoXXojvos lepov iXdovcrai 4>ep6vrcov ilrfj(f)ov Kpv^Brjv, rcov 
vopo(f)vXdKcov ovrLV* dv eKaaros rjyijraL /caAAtcrr' dv rcov 
TTepl Traiheiav dp^ai yevopevcov a> 8* dv TrXelGrat tJrfj(f)OL r 
ovp,^coGLVy 8oKLp,acr6els vtto rcov dXXcov dp\6vrcov rcov eXo- 
jiivojv, TrXrjv vopx)(f)vXdKcoVy dp^erco errj Trevre, I/ctoj bk Kara 

175 



766 c nAAT12N02 

C ravra aXXov cttl ravrrjv ttjv oLpxrjv aLpeXaOai, 

'Eav 8e rts" hyjjjLOGiav apx^jv ap^cov aTroddi'r^ Trplv i^iqKeiv 
avrcx) rrjv apX'^^ irXelov 7) rpLOLKOvra iTnSeofjLevrjv r)fji€p6jv, 
Tov avTOV TpOTTOV €771 nqv ap)(r]v dXXov KadiGrdvai ols rjv 

5 TOVTO TTpour^KovTOJS fieXov. Kal idv 6p(f)av(x)v iirirpoTTOs 
reXevTrjGTj rts*, ol 7rpo(nJKovT€9 Kal iTnSrj/jLovvres irpos Tra- 
rpo's Kat fjLrjTpo? H'^XP^ dveifjcajv Traihojv dXXov KadiGrdvrcxJV 

d evTOS Se/ca r]p,epa}V, -q ^rjpLLOvcrd ojv eKauros Spaxp^fj rrjs rjpiipas, 
fiexp^'TT^p dv T0Z9 TTaialv KaTaarrjGOJcn tov eTTLrpoTTOV. 

riacra Se Sijirov ttoXls diroXis dv yiyvonOy iv fj hiKaGrrjpLa 
• pari KadecFTcJoTa ecrj Kara rpoiTOV dcjxDvos S av SLKaarrjs r]pilv 

5 Kal p,rj TrXelaj rcov dvriSiKwv iv rats' dvaKplaeGL (f)deyy6- 
pL€voSy Kaddirep iv raT$ SiaLraig, ovk dv TTore Ikovos yivoiro 
TTepl TTjv Tctjv hiKaiiov KpioLV ojv €V€Ka ovT€ TToXXovs ovTas 
paoLov €v oLKaC,€iv ovT€ oAtyovs (pavAovs. aacpeg oe aec to 

e api(f)LG^rjTOVpi€vov XP^^^ yiyveadat irap €KaT€pojv, 6 8e 
Xpovos dpLa Kal to ^paSv to re TroAAa/cts" dvaKpiveiv Trpos 
TO (jyavepdv yiyveadat ttjv dpi(f)La^'iJTr]GLv Gvpi(j)opov. ojv 
€V€Ka TTpojTOv pL€v €ts" y€LT0vas UvaL XP'^ Tovs inLKaXovvTas 

5 dAAr^Aots" Kal tovs (f)lXovs t6 Kal crvveiSoTas otl /xaAtara 

767 'T'ds dpL(f)La^rjTOVpL€va9 Trpd^eiSy idv 8' dpa purj iv tovtols 

TLs LKavTjv Kpiaiv Xapi^dvrj, irpos dXXo SiKaaTT^piov Itoj* to 

Se TptTOV, dv Ta Svo hiKaGTrjpLa jjirj SvvrjTai SiaXXd^ai, 

reAos" iTTcdeTco ttj SlKrj. 

5 TpoTTOV S-q TLva Kal tcov SiKaarjpiwv at /caracjTacretS' 
dpxdvTCjov eldlv atpecrets"* irdvTa /xev ydp dpxovTa dvayKalov 
Kal hiKaoT'qv etvac tivcov, hiKaaTrjs 8e ovk dpx<J^v Kai Tiva 
TpoTTOv dpxojv ov Trdvv (f)avXo9 yiyverai ttjv t66^ rjpLepav 
T^Trep av Kpivojv ttjv Slkt^v diroTeXyj. 6evT€s Srj Kal tovs 

b St/caCTTas" COS" dpxovTaSy Xiyojpiev Tives dv elev TrpeTTovres 
Kal TLvcov dpa SiKacrTal Kal ttocfol i<f)* eKauTOV. KvpicaTaTOV 
pL€v Toivvv eaTO) SiKaaT'qpiov brrep dv avTOL eavTols airo- 
(f)'qvajGLV eKauTOi, KOLvfj TLvas iXopuevoL' 8vo Srj tcov Xolttcjv 

5 earco KpLTrjpia, to piev oTav tls Tiva ISlcottjv lSlcottjs, €7rat- 
Ttcopievos dSLK€iv avTov, dycov els Slktjv ^ovXrjTai SiaKpLdrjvaLf 

TO 8' OTTOTaV TO SrjpLOOriOV VTTO TLVOS TCJjV TToXlTOJV TjyrJTai TlS 

C dhiKeZadai Kal ^ovXrjdfj tw kolvco ^orjdeiv. XeKreov 8* ottolol 
T elalv Kal rives ol Kpirai. rrpajTOv Srj ^iKaaTrjpiov rjpLLV 
ycyveaOa) kolvov dnaaL to is to rpcTOV dpL<f)Lcr^r]Tov(Ti,v Ibico' 

176 



NOMfiN r 767 c 

rat? TT/DOS" dXXijXov^, yevofjuevov rfjSe tttj. Trdcra^ Srj to,? 
dpxd.s, OTToaai t€ /car* iviavrov /cat oirocrai TrAetoj XP^^^^ 5 
dpxovcnVy €7T€LSdv fjLeXXr) v€os iviavrov ficrd depivds rpoTrds 
rep €7Tl6vti jjL-qvl yiyvecjBaiy ravrrj? rrjs rj fie pas rfj rrpoadev 
TTOLvrag XPV '^^^^ dpxovras avveXdeZv et? €.v Upov /cat rov 
deov ofJLOcravras otov dTrdp^aadai Trdcrrjs apx^js €vcl ScKaari^v, d 
OS av €v OLpxV €Kaar7] apiaros re eti^at 00^17 /cat apiar av 
/cat ocrtdjrara rds St/ca? rots' TroAtrats" ai^roj rov iTnovra ivL- 
avrov (jiaivrjTai hiaKpiveiv . tovtcdv Se alpedevrcov ytyveadaL 
fxev SoKLfiacTLav iv rots' iXofievots avrols, idv Se dnoSoKL- ^ 
fxaaOfj TLs, erepov dvdaipeiadai Kara ravray rovs Se So/ct- 
/laGdevras St/ca^etv /xev rots' raAAa St/caori^pta (j)vyovuLy ttjv 
Se ilj7J(f)ov (j)av€pdv (f>epeLV' iirr^Koovs S* etvat /cat Beards 
rovrojv rcov Slkcov e^ dvdyKTjs fJiev ^ovXevrds /cat rovs dXXovs e 
dpxovras rovs eXofievovs avrovs, ra>v Se dXXcxiv rov ^ovXo- 
fjLevov. idv Se rt? evratrtarat rtva eKovra dSiKcos KpZvai 
TTjV hiKTjv, els rovs vop,o(f>vXaKas Icjov Karr]yopeir(x>' 6 Se 
6(f)Xojv rrjv roLavrrjv Slktjp VTrex^TCtj fiev rov ^Xd^ovs tco 5 
^Xa<f)devrL rd SmXAaiov rlvetv, idv Se fxeit^ovos d^ios elvat So^r] 
^TjjjLLaSy TTpoarLfMav rovs Kpivavras rrjv Slktjv on xP'h '^pds 
rovrio nadelv avrov rj airoriveiv ro) kolvco /cat rep rrjv Slktjv 
hiKaaapLevip . irepl Se rcov SrjpLoaLcov iy KXr^fjidr ojv dvayKaZov 
rrpajrov fiev rep TrXrjdeL /xeraStSop'at rrjs Kpiaetos — ot ydp 768 
aStKov/jLevoL iravres etotv, OTTorav ris rrjv ttoXlv dScKfj, /cat 
;^aAe77-ais' dv iv Slkj) ^epoiev dp^oipoi yiyv6p,evoL rcjv roiovrwv 
SiaKpicreojv — dAA* dpxrjv re etvat XP'^ '^S' roiavrrjs Slktjs /cat 
reAeun^v ets" rov SrjfjLOV aTToStSo/xeVr^v, rr)v Se ^do-avov iv ^ 
rats pLeyiGrais dpxoXs rpiaiv, as dv o re (f)evyo)v /cat o 
SicoKOJV crvvoiJLoXoyrjrov' idv Se /jlt} SvvrjaOov KOLVcovrjoai rrjs 
OjJLoXoyCas avroL, rrjv ^ovXtjv iTTiKpiveiv avrcov rrjv alpeaiv 
eKarepov. Set Se St^ /cat rwv lSlojv Slkcdv KOLVojveiv Kard b 
SvvafjLLV dnavras' o ydp aKoivojvTjros cov i^ovcruas rov avv- 
St/ca^etv -qyeXrai ro Trapdnav rrjs TToXecos ov p,eroxos elvai, 
Sta ravr* ovv Sr) /cat Kard (f>vXds dvayKalov StKaar-qptd re 
yiyveodai /cat KXrjpcp St/cao'ras' e/c rov napaxprjp'a dhia^do- ^ 
povs rais SeT^oeo-t St/ca^etP', ro Se reXos Kpiveiv rrdvrcov ratv 
roLOvrcjv iKelvo rd SLKaarr^piov, 6 ^apiev els y€ dvdpojTTLvqv 
SvvafjLtv d)S olov re dSLa<f>dopu)rara TrapeaKevdadaL, rots p^rj 
hvvap.evoLs fnjre iv rots yeirocn fii^re iv rots (f)vXeriKots c 
VOL. I 177 N 



; c nAAT12N02 

SiKaarrjpLOis aTTaXXdrTeadai, 

Nw Br] rrepl fiev hLKaorrjpia Tjfjitv — a StJ (f)afJL€V ovB^ <hs 

dpxoLS ovre cog /jltj paScov elTTovra avafji(f)va^r)Trjra)9 elprj- 

5 Kevai — 7T€pl jjiev ravra olov Trepiypaxf)'!] tls e^coOev Treptye- 

ypapL/jLevT] rd fi€v eLprjKev, rd 8' aTroAetTret ax^Sov rrpog 

ydp reAet vopbodeaias tj Slkojv dKpi^rjs vofxcuv Oiais a/xa /cat 

hiaipeais opdorara yiyvoir dv pLaKpcp. ravrais jxkv ovv 

d elpijaSw rrpos rep reAet TreptjiteVetv r^jxds, al 8e Trepl ras" 

aAAas" dpxds Karaardaeis ax^Bov ttjv TrXeiarrjv elXrj^aGiv 

vopiodeoiav to 8e dXov /cat dKpi^es rrepl ivo? re /cat Trdvrajv 

rcx)v Kard ttoXlv /cat ttoXltlkt^v Trdaav hioiK-qovj ovk eanv 

5 yeveadai aa<j)€s, Trplv dv rj Ste^oSos" avr' dpx^jS rd re Seure/aa 

/cat rd pi€ua /cat Trdvra pieprj rd eavrrjs dnoXa^ovaa Trpos 

riXog d(f)iKrjTai. vvv pirjv iv Tcp rrapovri p^^XP^ '^^ '^^^ 

e dpxovTOJv atpecrecDS" yevopLevrjs reXevrr] pukv tcjv epLirpoadev 

avTTj yiyvoiT* dv LKavrj, v6p,wv 8e Oeaecos dpx^] /cat dva^oXojv 

a/xa /cat okvcov ovSev ert Seopuevrj. 

KA. Hdvra>£ pLOL Kard vovv, cL ^eve, rd epLTrpoadev elprj- 

5 KW9y rrjv dpxrjv vvv reXevrij Trpoodifjas Trepl rojv re elprjpbevojv 

/cat Tojv pieXXovTWV prjdT^orecidai, ravra ert pidXXov €Keivojv 

eipr]Kas (fyiXiojS' 

)p A0. KaAois" roLVvv dv rjpLLV rj Trpea^vrcov €pi(f>pa)v TratSta 

P'^xpi' Bevp^ etrj rd vvv hia7T€7TaLapievr) . 

KA. KaAi^i^ rr]v GTTOvSrjv eoiKas SrjXovv rwv avSpwv. 
A0. Et/cos" y€' roSe 8' ivvoijo'copiev el crot 8o/cet Kaddrrep 
5 e/xot. 

KA. To TToZov Srj /cat 77ept rivcov; 

AO. Otad* on Kaddnep t,cjypd<f)(x)v ovhev Tripas ^x^lv rj 
rrpaypLareua 8o/cet Trept eKaarcov rcbv t^wojv, dXX rj rod XP^^~ 
V€LV 7] drroxpo-'^veiv , rj orihrjTTore KaXovac ro roiovrov ol 
b ^ojypd(l>ojv TTaiSes, ovk dv rrore So/cet Travaaadai KoapLovcray 
(Zare e77tSocrtv purjKer e^etv els ro /caAAtct) re /cat <^avep(x>repa 
yiyveodai rd yeypapupueva. 

KA. T^xeSov evvod) dKOVojv /cat avros" ravra d XeyeiSy 
5 eTret evrpi^rjs ye ovhapidjs yeyova rfj roiavrrj rex^rj. 

A0. Kat ovSev ye e^Xd^rjs, XRV^^H^^^^ 7^ H'W '^V ^^^ 

Traparvxovri rrepl avrrjg rjpuv Xoyco ro roiovhe, cos el rrore 

C ris emvorjceLe ypdipau t€ Cjq KoXXiurov t,cx)ov /cat rovr av 

pLTjheTTore errl <f)avX6repov d-AA* cTTt ro ^eXnov tcr;^etv rov err- 

178 



N0M12N r 769 c 

tovTO? act <ievai> xpovoVy avvvoetg on Ovqros ojv, et /jlt) riva 
KaraXeii/jeL SidSoxov 6? iiravopOovv re, idv n G^dXXrjrai 
TO l,(x)ov VTTO xp^^^^y '^^^^ '^o 7TapaXeL(j)dev VTTO TTJ9 dadeveias 5 
rrj£ iavrov Trpos ttjv rexvf]v olos re els to rrpoadev kcrrat 
<j)aihpvv(jjv TTOielv eVtStSovat, GpuKpov nva XP^^^^ avrat 
7t6vo£ TTapapLevel TrdfJUTToXus ; 

KA. 'AXrjerj. 

A0. Tt ovp; dp^ ov TOiovTOV So/cet crot to tov vofxoOerov d 
^ovXrjjjL elvai; irpwrov piev ypdifjac rovs vop^ovs Trpos ttjv 
dKpi^eiav /card Svvap.LV LKavojs' evretra Trpotovros tov xpovov 
/cat Tcjv So^dvTOJV €pycp Treipcopievov, dp otet rtva ovtojs 
d(f)pova yeyovevaL vopLodeTrjv, wgt dyvoeXv on TrdpuTToXXa 5 
avdyKTj TTapaXeiTTeadai rotavra, d Sel nva GVV€7TopL€vov 
eTTavopdovv, tva pbrjSapLjj x^^P^^y ^eXricjv Se r] TroAtreta 
/cat d Koopuos del yiyvqraL irepl ttjv coKLCjpLevrjv avrcp e 
ttoXlv; 

KA. Et/cds — 7TCOS yap ov; — ^ovXeodai TravTa ovtlvovv to 
Toiovrov. 

A0. OvKovv el TLS TLva pLTjXOivriv exoL TTpos TOVTO, epycp 5 
/cat XoyoLs Tiva rpoirov StSd^etev dv erepov €LT€ puecl^ova 
€LT€ iXdrroj nepl rovr^ ^X^^^ evvoiav, ottcos XPV ^i^Adrretv /cat 
eTTavopdovv vopLovs, ovk dv TTOTe Xeycov dTreiTTOL to tolovtov 
nplv eTTL reXos eXOelv ; 

KA. Yi(ji)s yap dv; yyo 

A0. OvKOVV ev TO) VVV TTapOVTL TTOLTjreOV ipLol /cat (J<f)CpV 
TOVTO ; 

KA. To TTOiov 8rj Xeyeis ; 

A0. 'EvretS-)) vopLodeTelv puev pueXXopuev, '^pr]VTai Se rjpiLV 5 
vopLO(f)vXaKes, rjp,els S' ev Svopbals tov ^lov, ol 8' (hs Trpos 
rjpids veoi, d/xa jueV, a)s cf)apL€V, Set vopiodeTelv rjpidsy d/xa 
8e TTeipdodaL Trocelv /cat tovtovs avTOVs vopioOeTas re /cat 
vopLO(f)vXaKas els to SvvaTov. 

ru\. It pirjv ; eiTrep olol re y eapuev LKava)s. D 

A0. 'AAA* ovv TTecpaTea ye /cat TrpodvpLTjTea. 

KA. Hois' ydp ov; 

A0. AeywpLev Brj Trpos avTovs' ^Q. (fylXot aojTTJpes v6pLa>v, 
rjpiels TTept eKduTOJv cLv TiOepiev tovs vopLOVs TrdpLTToXXa Tra/oa- 5 
Xeii/jopLev — dvdyKTj ydp — ov pLr]v dAA* dcra ye pur) apuiKpa /cat 
TO oAoi^ ets" SvvapLLV ovk dvrjUop,ev dTrepnjyrjTov KaddTrep tivl 

179 



b HAATONOS 

7T€piypa<l)fj' Tovro 8e herjuei avfjLTrXrjpovv vfjuds to TTepirjyrjdiv. 

C OTTOL he ^XiiTOvres Spdaere ro toiovtov, aKoveiV XPV- ^^" 
yiXXos fxev yap koI iyco /cat KAeivtas" elprjKapLiv re avra 
aXXrjXoLS ovK oXiyaKLs, o/jLoXoyovfjiev re XeyeaOaL /caAcos" 
Vfxds he r^fjLiv ^ovX6p,eda avyyvcopuovd^ re a/xa /cat pLadrjrds 

5 yiyveadai, ^XeTTOvras Trpos ravra els airep rjpLeXs avvexo^- 
prjGapiev aXXriXots rov vofio(f)vXaKd re /cat vofModeTTjv hetv 
^Xe7T€LV. rjv he tj avyxcjoprjais ev e^ovGa Ke(f>dXaiov , ottcos 

d TTOTe dvrjp dyados yiyvoir* dv, rrjv dvdpwTTO) TrpoaiJKOVGav 
dperrjv rrjs ^vxrjs ex^ov €/c nvos eTTiT-qhevpiaTOS t] twos 
rjdovs Tj TTOids KTifjcrecxJS tj eTTiBvixias ri h6$7]s '^ fxadrjixarajv 
TTOTe TLvcov, €LTe dppTjv Tts" Tcjv GvvoLKovvTCxJv ovaa 7) (f)vcns 

5 €tT€ drjXeLay vecov 7} yepovTCjJv y ottcjs ^Is tovtov tovto o Xe- 
yofxev T€Ta|X€VTi anovhrj ndaa ecrrat 8ta TravTOS tov ^lov, 
Tojv h dXXcQV OTTOcia efiTTohia tovtols fxr^hev TrpoTificov <f)aveZ- 

e rat /XT^S ooTLGOVVy TeXevTOLv he /cat TrdAecus", edv dvdaTaTOV 
dvdyKTj (j)aLvrjTaL yiyveuBaiy Trplv ideXecv hovXetov VTrofxel- 
vacrav ^vyov dpx^ordai vtto x^^povctjv, y] XeiveLV <l>vyfj ttjv 
ttoXlv COS" TrdvTa ra rotaura dp* eaO* VTrofieveTeov irdaxovTas 

5 TTplv dXXd^aordaL TvoXiTeiav rj x^^P^^^ dvdpcoTTOVs Tre^vKe 
TToieZv. ravTa rjpLeXs re epiTTpoodev avvajfioXoyi^adiJieda, /cat 
vvv vp,els r)p,a)V els raura e/carepa ^XeirovTes endviTe /cat 
Jl ipeyeTe rovs vopLovs oaoi (jlt) ravra Swarot, tovs he hvvaTOVS 
doTrdt^eode Te /cat ^iXo(j)p6v(x)s hexdfJievoL t^rJTe ev avToZs' ra 
8* aAAa eTnTTjhevfJiaTa /cat irpos dXXa TeivovTa twv dyaOaJv 
XeyofjLevojv ;!^atpetv xPV 'TTpouayopeveiv. 

5 'Apxrj he eoTCJ tG)v fxeTa raura T^/xtv vopaov rjhe rt?, dcf) 
lepajv rjpyjjLevrj. tov dpiBjxov yap hr) het rrpcoTOV dvaXa^eiv 
rjfjLds TOV TCJV TrevTaKLGX^'Xlcov /cat rerra/oa/covra, ocras" ^Ix^v 

b re /cat €;)^et rofjuds TrpoG^opovs o Te oXos d/xa /cat o /cara 
<^vXdsy o hrj TOV TTavTOS edep^ev hcoheKaTTjfxopLov, ev /cat eiKoaiv 
ecKoadKLS op^orara <f>vv. e^et he Stavo/xas" hcoheKa [xev 6 nds 
dpiOpLos rjpiZvy hcoheKa he /cat o ttjs (J)vXrjs' eKdaTr^v hr] ttjv 

5 fjLoZpav hiavoeZadai xp^d)v ws od^av lepdvy deov hojpoVy eiro- 
fievrjv rot? pbrjalv /cat ttj tov iravTos Trepiohw. hto /cat irduav 
ttoXlv dyei puev to ovpi(f)VTOV lepovv avrds, dXXoL he dXXujv 
LGCos opdoTepov eveifxavTo t€ /cat evTVX^CTTepov edeLcocrav ttjv 

C hiavopuffV rjfieZs he ovv vvv ^a/xev opdoTara TrporjprjaOaL rov 
TOJV TTevTaKLGXt'Xlcov /cat TCTTapdKovra dpidfioVy os rrdaas 

180 



NOMftN 5" 



771 C 



Tcts" Stavo/xas" €)(€l ft^XPt tcov ScoSc/ca aTTo jjuds dp^dfjuevos 
ttXtji' eVSe/caSos" — aVTrj S' €;;^€t upuKporarov ta/xa* ctti ddrcpa 
yap vyLrjs yLyverai SvoXv iaTiaiv dTTOve/JLrjdelaaLv — d)s 8' c 
€GTLV ravra dXrjdcos oVra, Kara crxoXrjV ovk dv ttoXvs iiri- 
hei^eiev fivdos. TnorrevaavTes Srj rd vvv rfj Trapovarj (jirfpirj 
KOI Xoycpy veipicjjpiiv re ravrrfv, /cat cKdcrrr] fiOLpa deov r) deoiv d 
rralha ein^ripLiaavres ^ ^copLovs re /cat rd tovtols TrpoaiJKOVTa 
aTToSovTCS", dvaccbv irepc avvoSovs €77* avToXs TTOLcopueda 8vo 
Tov pLTjvoSi ScoSe/ca pukv rrj rrjs ^vXrjs SiavopLrj, ScoSe/ca Se 
avTO) TO) rrjs TToXecos Sta/Lt€ptcr^a>, dewv pukv Srj npajrov ^dpiro^ e 
€V€Ka /cat rwv Trepl deovs, Sevrepov Se rjpbojv avrajv oIk€l6- 
TTjTos T€ TTepL /Cat yvwpLGecDS dXXijXajVj d}s <j>aipLev dv, /cat 
opLiXlas eVe/ca Trdarjs. irpos ydp Srj rrjv rcov ydpbojv kolvco- g 
viav /cat avpLpLet^LV dvayKaicos ^x^i rrjv dyvocav e^atpeZv 
Trap* (Lv re tls ayerat /cat a /cat ois e/cStScoo-t, Trept Travrds 

TTOLOVfJLGVOV OTL /XaAtCTTa TO jLtT^ 0<j)dXX€odaL pLT^SapLCOS Iv TOtS" 

TotovTots" /cara to Sui^aToi^. t^s" ovv roiavTrjs gttovStjs eVe/ca r 
Xpr) Kql rds Traihids Troteta^at x^p^^ovrds re /cat xop^vovaag 
Kopovs /cat KQpas, /cat a/xa S-)^ decopovvrds t€ /cat Oeojpov- 772 
pLevovs puerd Xoyov re /cat rjXiKLas nvos exovarjs elKvias 
7Tpo<j)daeLS, yvpivovs /cat yu/xvas pLexp^^rep alhovs G(x)<j)povo£ 
eKdcrrcov. rovrojv 8' einpLeXr^rds Trdvrojv /cat KOGpurjrds rovs 
rcov x^pd^^ dpxovras yiyveaBai /cat vopuoderas puerd rojv c 
vop.o(f)vXdKCx)v , daov dv rjpLels c/cAetTroj/xev rdrrovres' dva- 
yKaZov he, oTrep eiTTopLev, irepL ra roiavra irdvra daa apuKpd 
/cat TToAAo. vopio6er7]v puev e/cAetVetv, tou? 8* epLTrelpovs del b 
/car ev'tauTOi' ycyvopLevovs avrajv, dno rrjs XP^^'as" piavddvov- 
ras, rdrreadai /cat eTravopdovpievovs KiveZv Kar eviavrov, 
eojs dv dpos LKavos ho^j) rwv roLovrwv vopbipLajv /cat eTTcrr^Sev- 
pidrajv yeyovevai. ;^/30vos' /xev ow puerpLos a/xa /cat LKavos c 
yuyvoir' dv rrjs epLireLpias ScxacTYjpl^ dvoLCJjv re /cat xop^iojv, 
€7tI rrdvra /cat eKaara rax^^is, t,(jjvros p^ev rod rd^avros vopio- 
Berov KOLvfj, reXos he axdvros, avrds eKdaras rds dpxds c 
ets" Tous" vop,o(f)vXaKas ela^epovaas rd TrapaXeiTTOpuevov rijs 
avrojv dpxrjs eiravopdoyoOai, puexpf'Trep dv reXos '^X^''^ eKaarov 
ho^j] rov KaXojs e^etpydadaL, rore he dKLvrjra depuevovs, Tjhrj 
Xprjadai puerd rcov dXXcuv vopLWV ovs era^e Kar dpxds d dels 5 
awTOtS" vopLoderrjs' cLv rrepi Kivelv p^ev eKovras pLrjheirore 
pLrjhev, el he ris dvdyKT] ho^eU rrore KaraXa^eZv, Trdaas p^ev 

181 



72 d nAAT12N02 

d Tots' cLpxoLS XPV GTVf^^ovXovg TTavra he rov Srj^ov /cat Trdaas 
decjv fjuavreias iTreXOovras, eav avjJL(f)(x}va)(jL Trdvreg, ovtco 
KLveZv, dXXcos Se {jL-qSeTTore jjLrjSafJLCtjg , dXXd tov KcoXvovra del 
/caret vofiov Kparelv. 

5 'OttoScv Tis ovu /cat oTrrjvuKa rwv irevre /cat et/cocrt yeyovo- 
Tcov errjy gkottojv /cat GKOTTOUfxevos vtt* aXXcov, Kara vovv 
iavTcp /cat Trpenovra ets" TratSojv KOivcovlav /cat yiveaiv 

e €^T]vp7]K€vaL 7TLar€V€i, ya/xetTOJ puev nds evrog rcov irevre /cat 
rpidKOvra ira>v, to Se Trperrov /cat to apfiorrov (Ls XPV 
i,r)T€LV, TTpcbrov iTTaKovadrci) ' Set yap, ws <l>v^oiv KAetvtas", 
efjLTTpoaOev rod vopLOV npooipiLov olk€lov eKaorco Trpondevai. 

5 KA. KaAAtcjTa, (5 ^eVe, StefJbvrjfJLovevaas, eAa/SeV re rov 
Aoyou Katpov /cat /xaA' e/>tot 8o/cowt etvat avjUL/JLerpov. 
A0. Eu Aeyets". ^iQ Trat, roivvv cf)d)fji€v dy aOcov Trarepcuv 
773 <i>^v'^^> Tovg TTapd rols epu^podLV evho^ovs ydpiovs XPV yot/^etv, 
ot CTOt TTapaivolev dv fJLrj (f)€vy€LV rov tojv Trevqrojv firjSe tov 
Tcjv ttXovgLojv 8tc6/cetv SLa(f)€p6vTcos ydjJLov, dAA* idv rdAAa 
ladt^Tj, TOV VTToSeeaTepov del TijJbdjVTa els ttjv KoivwvLav 

c Gvvievai. Tjj re yap TroXei crv/JLcfyopov dv etr] TavTTj Tats re 
awtouCTats" eartats" to yap ofxaXov /cat avfifieTpov dKpdTOV 
fjuvplov hia^epei Trpos dpeTiqv. Koopacov re TraTepojv xPV 

b Trpodv/JLeladaL yiyveadai K'qSeaTT^v tov avTco arvveiSoTa tra/xcu- 
Tepov dfjua /cat daTTOV tov SeovTOs irpos Traoas rds" irpd^eis 
(f^epofjuevov tov 8' evavTiws 7Te(f)VK6Ta iirl TdvavTia xPV 
KTjSevjJiaTa TTOpeveadai. /cat /caret Trai^ros" ets" ecrco fivdos 

5 ydfJLov TOV yap ttj TrdAet 8et (jvfi<f)epovTa fivrjCTTeveiv ydpuov 
eKaGTOV, ov tov tJSlgtov avTco. ^eperat 8e 7Ta>s Trds del 
/caret ij)VGLV Trpos tov op^oioTaTOV avTco, odev dvclifxaXog rj 

C TToAts" oAt^ yiyveTai p^/07^jLtacrtV re /cat TpoiTCov rjdeGLV e^ ojv 
d fXT] ^ovXofjLeOa Gvpu^aiveiv rjp.LV, /cat /xctAtara GvpL^aivei 
rats' TrXeLGTais TroXeGL. ravra 8-)^ 8td Aoyou pbkv vo/jlo) 
TTpoGTdTTeiv, pLT] yap,etv ttXovglov ttXovglov, p.TjSe noXXd 

5 SvvdpLevov TrpdTTeiv dXXov tolovtov, daTTOvg 8e rjdeGC rrpos 
^paSvTepovg /cat ^pahvTepovs Trpos ddTTOvs dvayKd^eiv ttj 
Tcbv ydp^cov KOLVCJvia iropeveGdai, Trpos tco yeXola elvai dvpuov 
av eyeipai TroAAots" ov yap pdhiov evvoeZv otl ttoXlv elvai 

d 8et Slktjv KpaTTJpos KeKpap,evr)v, ov fxaivopLevos piev otvos 
eyKex^p^^vos ^et, /coAa^o/Zevos" 8e vtto VTJ(f)ovTOS eTepov deov 
KaXrjv KOLVOJvlav Xa^div dyadov TTcD/xa /cat pueTpiov dTrepyd- 

182 



N0M12N r 773 

^erai. tovt ovv ycyvojjL^vov iv rfj tojv iraihcov /xet^et hiopdv 
d)S €7Tos elireZv ^vvaros ovSets' rovrwv Srj ^a/Dtv idv fxlv 5 
vojjicp ra roLavra avayKolov, eTraSovra Se rreideiv Treipdodai 
rrjv Tcov TraiScov ofiaXoTrjra avrojv avroZs rrjs rcov ydfJLOJV 
laorrfTOS dirXrjGrov XPVH'^'^^^ ovarjg rrepl TrXeiovos e/ca- e 
GTOV TTOtetcr^at, /cat hi oveihovs drrorpeTreLv rov irepl ra 
XP'TjiJiCLTa iv Tols ydfJLOL? ioTTOvhaKora, dXXd fxr] ypaTrrcv vojjLCp 
^Lat^ojxevov . 

Ilept yd/JLcov 8rj raur' earoj Trapajxydta Xeyofxeva, /cat Srj 5 
/cat ra e/XTrpoade tovtcjv prjOevra, C09 XPV '^V^ detyevovs 
(f>va€a)s dvTex€adaL ro) TralSas Traihojv KaraXeiTTOVTa aet ro) 
deep VTTTjperas dvd^ avrov TrapaSiSovaL. Trdvra ovv ravra 774 
/cat €Tt irXeicx) tls dv eiTroL Trepl ydficov [d)s XPV yotAtetv,] 
TTpooL/JLLai^ofievos opOoJS' dv 8' apa rts" pirj TreidiqTai eKcLv, 
aXXorpLov Se avrov /cat dKOLVwvrjrov iv rfj iroXei exy /cat 
ayapbos d)v yevrjrat 7T€VT€KaiTpcaKOVTOVTr]s , ^T^/xtoucr^o) /car' 5 
eviavrov e/caarov, o pLeytorrov piiv ripirjpLa K€KTiqpiivos e/carov 
opaxP'O.lSf 6 Sc ro Sevrepov i^SopLTjKovra, rpirov he i^tj- 
Kovra, o Se ro riraprov rpcdKovra. rovro S' eorcj rrjs "Upas 
lepov. o Se pLT) iKrivwv /car' iviavrov SeKarrXdatov o</>etAer6o • b 
Trparreado) Se 6 rapiias rrjs Oeov, purj iKirpd^as Sc avros 
o(/)€LXircjo /cat iv rats evdvvais rod rouovrov Xoyov virexiTCo 
irds. etV /xev ovv XPVH'^'^^ ^ P'V ^^^^^^ yapuelv ravra 
L,r)pLLOV(j6oj, npirjs Se rrapd rd)V vecorepajv dnpLog irdarjs 5 
€Groj, /cat pirjSels viraKOviraj pirjSev avra> €K<jjv rd)v vicjv idv 
8e KoXdiC,€LV nvd imx^Lpfjy rrds rw dSiKovpLevo) ^orjOeiro) /cat 
apLVveroj, purj ^or)dd)v 8e o rrapayevopuevos SecXos re dpua c 
/cat /ca/cos" vtto rov vopbov iroXirr]? etvai Xeyeudo). 

Ylepi he TTpoLKOs elprjr ai puev /cat irporepov, elp-qadcx) he 
TToXiv COS taa ai^rt lgojv iorlv ro pbijre Xapb^dvovn p^'^r^ 
eKhihovri hid xpf]P'dra)v drropLav yrjpdaKecv rovs TTevrjras' rd 5 
yap avay/cata vrrapxovra ean Trdcn rd)v iv ravrrj rfj TToXec 
v^pLS he Tjrrov yvvai^l /cat hovXeia raireivr] /cat dveXevOepos 
hid xpijP'Oi'Ta rols yijpLaai yiyvoiro dv. /cat d p^ev rreidopLevos d 
ev rd)v KaXctjv hpcorj rovr dv 6 he pur] TTeidopuevos rj hihovs 7) 
XapL^dva>v irXeov 7) rrevrrjKovra d^ia hpaxpicov ioOrjros X'^P^^y 
o he pLvds, 6 he rpiCJv rjpLtpLvaiajv, 6 he hvolv pivaXv — d to 
pLeytarov ripLrjpba KeKrr]pievos — 6<j>eLXerci) pLev rw hrjpLOGLU) 5 
roGovrov erepov, ro he hodev rj Xrj<j)6ev lepov earoj rijs 

183 



HAATfiNOS 

"Hpa? T€ Kau Tov Atds", Trparrovnuv 8e ot ra/xtat rovrotv 
TOtv deoLV, Kaddirep ippi^drj rcbv jjurj yapbovvrajv iripi rovs 
ra/xtas" eKTrparreiv iKaorore rovs ttjs ' Hpas" t) Trap at^roiv 
iKaoTOvs rrjv ^7^/xtW €Ktlv€iv. 

^Kyyvrjv Se etvat Kvpiav irarpos fjLev TTpaJrov, Sevrepav 

TTOLTTTrOV, TpLTTjV §€ ttScA^cDv OfJLOTraTpiWV, icLV 8e /XT^Sc €19 fj 

rovrojVy rrjv irpos firjrpos /xera rovro eivai Kvpiav dxjavrojs' 
eav 8' dpa rvx^] tls drjdr^s avpL^aivQ, rovs iyyvrara yevovs 
a€t Kvpiovs elvai fierd rajv iTnrpoTTOJV. 

"Ocra Se TTporeXeia ydficov t^ tLs dXXrj nepl rd roiavra 
Upovpyia fjLcXXovTCov ?) yiyvopieviov tj yeyovorojv npocnJKOvord 
ioTLv reXcLcrdaiy rovs e^rjyrjrdg ipcordjvra xp'^ KO-f' Treidopievov 
eKeivoLS cKaarov rjyeladai irdvTa iavro) pberplajs yiyveadai. 

Ylepl 8e Tcx)v eGridaeojVy (jiiXovs fiev XPV '^^^ ^tAa? 
fjLTj TrXelovs 7T€VT€ €KaT€pojv cjvyKaXelVy avyyevojv 8e /cat 
OLKeiiov coaavTCOs roaovrovs dXXovs eKarepcov dvdX(x)[xa 8e 
jXTj yiyveadai irXiov tj Kara rrjv ovGiav p/qheviy ra> p.ev els 
XP'ijP'OLra jxeyiGrip puvdv, rd) 8 TJfiiav rod roaovrov, rw 8* icf)- 
€^7Js ovroj, Kaddirep VTTO^€^r)K€v eKdorco ro rLfJLrjfJLa. Kal rov 
fjL€V 7T€L66fjL€Vov rcp vofiu) €7TaLV€LV XR'^ Tvdvras , rdv 8e drrei- 
dovvra KoXa^ovrojv ol vofjLO(f>vXaK€s cos dTreipoKaXov re dvra 
Kal drraihevrov rwv rrepl rds vvfjLcfyiKds Movaas vofjLOJV. Triveiv 
he els jJLedrjv ovre dXXodi ttov TrpeireL, TrXrjv ev rals rod rdv 
olvov hovros deov eoprals, ovh^ dG<j)aXes, ovr^ ovv Srj rrepl 
ydfjLovs eaTTOvSaKora, ev ols eix<j)pova /xaAtcrra elvai TrpeneL 
vvfjL(f)rjv Kal vviJi<f)Lov puera^oXr^v ov apuKpdv ^iov p,eraXXdr- 
rovras. a/xa 8e Kal rd yevvcopLevov drrcos on /xaAtcrra e^ 
€pL(f)p6va)v del ylyvrjraL' ax^Sdv ydp dSrjXov OTToia vv^ t) 
(j>di)s avrd yevvqaeL puerd deov ' Kal Trpds rovroLS 8et pLT] ru)v 
acjjpidrojv 8taAce;^u/xev6ov vtto piedrjs yiyveodai rrjv Traihovpyiav, 
dXX evnayes dirXaves rjavxcL^dv re ev {XY^xpa GwiaraGdai 
rd (f>v6pLevov . d Se hicpvixipuevos avrds re ^eperai ndvrr] Kal 
(f)epeL, Xvrrojv Kara re crcD/xa Kal ipvx'rjv' UTreipeiv ovv irapd- 
<f)opos a/xa /cat /ca/co? o puedvajv, oior avd)p,aXa Kal aTnora 
Kal ovhev evdvTTopov rjdos ovhe crcD/xa e/c rcjv elKorwv yevvipi) 
TTor dv. hid pidXXov pbev dXov rdv eviavrdv Kal ^iov XPV> 
pLaXtara 8e dirdaov dv yevva xP^v^Vy evXa^elGdai Kal p,r] 
TTpdrreiv pi'^re oaa voacoSrj eKovra elvat pnqre daa v^pecos rj 
dSiKLas exdpLeva — els ydp rds tcjv yevvajpuevcuv ipvxds Kal 

184 



NOMON r 775 d 

crayjjiara dvayKatov i^ofiopyvv^evov eKTVirovadai /cat tlkt€IV 
navrr) (jiavXorepa — SLa<f>€p6vroJS Se iK€Lvrjv ttjv rjixepav Kal e 
vvKra airix^odai tojv irepl ra roiavra' OLpxh 7^9 '^^^ Q€.os €v 
avdpojTTOLS ISpvfjLevrj croj^et Trdvra, TLpLrjs idv ttjs TrpoarjKovcrrjs 
avrfj Trap iKdcrrov ruiv xpcopiivojv Xayxon^j] - 

NofiLuavra S' elvau XP'^ tov yapbovvra raiv OLKiaiv ralv €v 5 
TO) kXtipoj TTjv irepav olov veorrcov eyyivviqaLV Kat Tpo(f)rjv, yy6 
XOjpiadevTa dno irarpos Kal pLrjTpos tov ydfJLOv eKei iroLeladai 
Kal TTjv oIktjgiv Kal r7)v Tpo(f>r)V avrov Kal rcov reKvcov. iv 
yap rals ^tAtats" ^dv /xev ttoOos evfj tls, KoXXa Kal uvvSeL 
Trdvra rjOrj' KaraKoprjs 8e uvvovaia Kal ovk laxovaa tov 5 
Sid xpovov TToOov diToppeZv dXkrjXojv TTOiet virep^oXats 
TTXrjGfjLovfjs . (Lv Srj X^P^^ jJLTjrpl Kal narpl /cat rot? rrjs 
yvvaLKog oIk€lols napevras XPV '^^^ avrcbv olKrjO€LS, olov 
€19 dTTOLKiav d(f)LKOfji€VovSf avTovs eTTiGKOTTOvvrds T€ dfia b 
/cat eTTLGKOTTOVfievovs OLKelVy yevvcovrds re Kal €KTp€(f)OVTas 
TratSas", Kaddnep XapbrrdSa tov ^iov TrapaSiSovras dXXois €^ 
dXXatv, depairevovTas del deovs /caret vopLOvs. 

RrrJ/xara 8e to jxcTa tovto TTola dv tls KeKTrjfjbevos ipLfxe- 5 
XeaTdTTjv ovaiav KeKTfiTo; ra /xev ovv noXXd ovt€ vorjaai 
XaXeTTov ovT€ /cri^crao-^at, ra Se Si] tcov olk€tcov p^aAeTra 
TrdvTTj. TO 8 acTioVf OVK opd(x)s ttojs /cat rtva Tpoirov opdcjs c 
irepl avTcov Xiyofiev evavTia ydp rat? ;\;/)etats', /cat /caret ras" 
Xp€Las aVf TTOLov/jieda irepl SovXojv Kal ra Xeyofieva. 

ME, Ylcbs 8' av TOVTO Xeyofxev; ov ydp ttoj puavOdvofiev, 
(L ^€V€, OTL ra vvv (j)pdt,eiS' 5 

A0. Kat /xoAa ye, cS MeytAAe, elKOTUJS' ax^Sov ydp 
rravTCov tojv ^I^XXtJvojv t) Aa/ce8at/xovt6DV etAcoreta 7tX€lgt7]v 
aTTopiav TrapdaxocT* dv Kal cpiv rots' p^ev ws €v, toIs 8' cos" 
OVK €V yeyovvld ioTiv — eAarroi 8e 7) t€ * H/)a/cAea)rct)v 
8ovA€ta TTJg TCOV MapLavSvvojv KaTahovXojoecos €pLV dv €xol, d 
TO GerraAcov r' av 7T€V€gtlk6v eOvos — els a Kal rrdvTa ra 
ToiavTa ^Xei/javTas r)p,ds tl xPV '^ol€lv nepl KTrjaews oLKeTcov; 
o Srj TTapidiV TO) Xoycp €tvxov elncov, Kal av fie eiKOTCus rt 
TTore ^/oa^ot/xt rjpojTrjGas, ToSe eaTiv. lap^ev otl ttov irdvTes 5 
eLTTOipLev dv a>s" XPV ^ovXovs ws evpieveoTdTovs eKTrjadai Kal 
apiOTOvs' TToXXol ydp dheX^wv rjSr) SovXol Kal vea)v tloIv 
KpeiTTOVs npos dpeTTjv Trdaav yevopievoL, aeawKaacv SeaTTOTas 
Kal /cn^/xara ra? re OLKijaecs avTcov oXas. ra£»ra ydp tapiev e 

185 



76 e nAAT12N02 

TTOV 7T€pl SovXcov XeyojjLeva. 
ME. Ti ^rjv; 
A0 . OvKovv Kal TOvvavTLOV, (l)s vyieg ovhev 4'^XV^ BovXtjs, 

5 OvSe 7TL(7T€V€LV OvSeTTOT OvSeV TO) yeV€L Set TOV VOVV K€KTr)- 

fjL€vov; 6 Se (jocf)a)TaTOS rjfjLiP rwv TTOLrjrojv /cat aTre^rjvaTO, 
VTTep TOV Atos" dyopevcoVy wg — 
777 rjfJii'Crv yap re voov, (JiTjatv, aTrajxeiperai evpvoTra Zeus' 

dvSpojv, ov£ dv Srj /caret SovXiov rjfiap eXjjGL. 
ravra Srj StaXa^ovres e/cacrrot rots' StavoTy/xacrtj^ ol /juev 
TTLGrevovGL re ovSev yevei olKerajv, Kara Se drjpiojv (f)v<jLV 
5 Kevrpoig /cat fxaurL^iv ov rpls fiovov aAAa TroAAa/cts" direp- 
ydt^ovrai SouAas" ras' iffv^ds ra>v OLKerajv ol 8' av rdvavria 
rovrojv Spojcn Trdvra. 
ME. Tt p.riv; 

b KA. Tt ovv Srj ■)(p7] TTOieZvy rovrojVy c5 ^eve, Sta^epo/xeVcov 
ovr oj, TT€pl rrjs rjjjierepas av -x^cLpas rj/Jids, rrjs re Kri^aecos dfia 
/cat /coAacjecas" rwv SovXcdv rrepi; 

A0. Tt 8', d) KAetvta; SrjXov (Ls eTreLSr) SvgkoXov eari 

5 ro dpefjifJLa dvdpcoTTOs, /cat irpog rrjv avayKaiav Stdptctv, ro 
hovXov re epycp Siopii^eadac /cat eXevOepov /cat heGTrorr^v, 
ovSafJbdjg evxpy](JTov edeXeiv elvai re /cat yiyveodaL <^ati^erat, 

C ;(aAe77ov St) ro KrrjiJia' epycp yap TroAAa/cts" eVtSeSet/crat Trept 
rots' M.eGGrjVLOJV avx^ds elojdvias dTToardoeLs yiyveaOai, /cat 
77ept ye ras ra>v c/c jLttas" (f)OJvrjs ttoXXovs o Ik eras Krcofievajv 
TToXeLS, daa /ca/ca au/x^atVet, /cat ert ra rcJov Xeyop^evajv irepi- 

^ hivojv rojv TTepl rrjv TraAtav yiyvop^evcov TravrohaTrd /cAcottcDi/ 
epya re Kal 7raBrj}xara. Trpos a rts" av iravra ^Xei/ias Sta- 
TTop-qGeie ri XP'^ Spdv irepi aTrdvrcjov rcx)v roLovrcov. hvo Srj 
XenreoOov p.6vco jJLrjxo.va, p,rjre irarpiajras aXXrjXwv elvai rovs 

d pieXXovras paov hovXevaeiv , dGvp.(f)a)vovs re els ^vvapav on 
fidXcGra, rpe(f)etv 8' aurous" dpOaJs, p^r} pLovov eKeiviov eVe/ca, 
TrXeov Se avrcx)v Trponpicovras' rj 8e rpocfyrj rcjv roLOvrojv 
pLTjre nvd v^piv v^pli^eiv els rovs olKeras, rjrrov Se, et 

p Swardv, aSt/cetv ?) rous" e^ lgov. SLaSrjXos yap o <f)VGei /cat 
/XT^ TT'Aacrrcos' oe^cov rrjv Slktjv, puLGcov Se ovrws ro dhiKov, ev 
rovrois rojv dvdpcjTTCjJv ev ols avrcp pahiov dhiKeZv o irept ra 
rcov SovXcov ovv rjdr) Kal rrpd^eis yiyvopuevos ns " apaavros 

e rod re dvoGiov nepi Kal aSt/cot>, " GTreipeiv els dperrjs eK^VGiv 
LKavcoraros dv etrj, ravrov S' ecrr* etTretv rovro opdcvs dpua 

186 



N0M12N 5" 777 e 

Xeyovra iiri re heGirorrj /cat rvpavvo) Kai ndcrav hwaureiav 
SvvaarevovTL npog dadevecrTepov eavrov. KoXdl,€LV ye pL'qv 
€v Slkt] SouAous" Set, Kal purj vovderovvras cos eXevdepovs 5 

6pV7TT€(jdaL TTOLeZv TTjV hk oIkItOV TTpOGpTjaLV XPV ^X^^^^ 

€7TLTa^Lv Trdaav ytyveadaL, pbrj TTpoGTrai^ovras pLTjSafjLfj purj- 778 
Sa/Jbojs OLKeraLS, /a'J^t' ovv drjAeiais /XT^re dppecrtv, d Srj irpos 
hovXovs <f>iXovGL TToXXol G(f)6Spa dvoijrcos dpvTTTOvres x^^^~ 
TTCorepov dTrepyd^eadai tov ^iov iK€LVOLS re dp)(ea6aL /cat 
iavTOLs dpx^LV. 5 

KA. ^Opdcos Aeyets". 

A0. OvKovv ore tls OLKeraLS KaT€(JK€vaafX€vos els hvvafjLiv 
elrj irXridei /cat iTTLTrjheLorrjTi rrpos eKdaras rds rcov epycov 
TTapa^orjdeias y ro Srj fxerd tovto OLK'^aeLS XPV ^^^Ypd^eiv 
TO) Xoycp; 10 

KA. Ildvv pikv ovv. 

A0. Kat avpLTrdarqs y€ (Ls eiros eiirelv eot/cev t"^? olkoSo- b 
fjLLKTJs TrepL Tijv y€ St] veav /cat douKrjrov ev ra> Trpoadev ttoXlv 
€7TLix€Xiqr4ov elvai, riva rpoTTOv e/caara e^et tovtojv rrepi re 
lepd /cat T€LX'^- ydpucov S' r^v efiTrpocrOev ravra, co KAetvta, 
vvv 8' €7T€i7T€p Xoycp ytyverat, /cat /xoA iyxcjopel ravrr] 5 
yiyveadai rd vvv epyco p^rjv orav yiyvrjrai, ravr' epLTTpocrdev 
Tojv ydfjLOJV, idv deos edeXr^, TroLt^aavres, e/cetva rjSr) t6t€ iirl 
rrddLV TOLS tolovtols aTToreXovfxev . vvv Se fJLovov oaov nvd C 
TVTTov avTOJv 8t' oAtycjOi^ iTTe^eXdcofxev. 

KA. Udvv fJL€v ovv. 

A0. Ta fjuev roLvvv Upd ndaav Tvepi^ rr\v re dyopdv xpr^ 
KaracTKevd^eLVf /cat ttjv ttoXlv dXrjv iv kvkXco Trpos tols viprj- 5 
Aots" TOJV TOTTOJVy €V€pK€ias Te /Cat KaOapoTTjTOs ;\;a/3tv Trpos 
Se avTOLS OLKijaeis Te dp^ovTCDV /cat St/cacrrT^pia, iv ols ras" 
St/ca? COS" lepojTdTOLS ovctlv Xtji/iovTai Te /cat Scogovgl, ra p.ev 
d)s OGLOJV TTepLy Td 8e /cat tolovtwv deojv ISpv/juaTa' /cat iv d 
TOVTOis [St/cacTTT^pta, ev ots"] at re tojv (fjovojv TTpeTrovaai St/cat 
ytyvotvT* dv /cat 60a davdTOJV d^ta aSt/o^jLtara. Trept 8e ret- 
;!^a)y, oj MeytAAe, eyojy* dv tjj YtTrdpTrj GVjj,(f)€poLfJbrjv to Kad- 
evSeiv idv iv ttj yfj /cara/cet/xeva ra Tet;)^!^ /cat /xt^ iiravLGTa- 5 
vat, TOJvSe etve/ca. /caAo)? p^ev Kat 6 ttolt^tlkos virep avTOJV 
Xoyos VfJLveLTaL, to ;^aA/ca /cat ui^iqpd Setv etvat ra Tei)(7^ 
fidXXov 7) yj^tva' to S rfpLeTepov ert Trpos" rourots" yeXojT dv e 
SiKaiojs TrdfjLTToXvv 6<f)XoLy to kut iviavTOV puev e/CTre/XTretv ets" 

187 



78 e nAAT12N02 

rrjv ;^a>/)av rovs veovs, ra fiev uKajpovraSf ra Se racfypev- 
aovras, ra Se koI Sta rivcov olKoSofjiTJueajv eip^ovras rovs 

5 TToXefjLLOVs, cus" Srj rwv opcov rrjs ^ojpas ovk edaovras iin- 
jSatVetv, reZ^os Se TTepL^aXoipueda, o npajrov jjuev irpos vyieiav 
TOis TToXeaiv ovSapLOJS GVjjL<f)€p€L, TTpos he TLva jiaXdaKTjv e^iv 
rals ^vxais rwv ivoiKovvrojv eicode Trotetv, TrpoKaXovfjievov 
779 €LS avTO Karai^e'vyovras firj djxvveadai rovs TToXepuLOVSy firjSe 
TO) cf)povp€Lv del, TLvas iv avrfj vvKTcop /cat fxed^ rjpiepaVy 
TOVTcp TTJs crojrrjpias rvyxdveiv, relxecn Se koL nvXais Sia- 
voeZadaL (f)pa)(devTas re /cat KaOevSovras crcorrjpias ovrws 

5 €^€LV pLir^xP-vds y ojs €771 TO fiT) TTovelv yeyovoTas , dyvoovvras 
8' av TTjv paarojvrjv d)s ovrcos earlv eK tojv ttovojv' Ik 
paarwvqs Se ye, olfiac, rrjs aloxpo-s ol ttovol /cat paSvpiias 
7r€(f)VKaGL yiyveod ai ndXiv. dJOC el Srj reixos ye tl p^pecov 

b dvdpojTTOLS elvaiy rds ot/coSo/xtas" XPV '''^^ '^^^ ISicov oLKijaewv 
ovrcos e^ ^PXV^ ^dXXeodaiy ottojs dv fj irdaa r] ttoXls ev 
reZxoSy o/xaAdrT^rt re /cat opLOLorrjGiv els rds 0801;? Trauchv 
rCiV olK'qGeojv exovawv evepKetav, ISetv re ovk dr^Ses puds 

5 olKias GXT^P'OL exovGTjs avrrjsy e'ls re rrjv rrjs (fyvXaKrjs 
paarojvTjv oXcp /cat rravrl irpos ocorripiav yiyvoir* dv 8ta- 
<f)opoS' rovrojv he, d)^ dv fievyj rd /car' dpxds olKoSopir]- 
Oevra, pueXeiv piev /xaAtcrra rots' evoiKOVGL irpeTTOv dv e'lr], 

C rovs he dorvvopLovs empieXelGdai /cat irpoGavayKal^ovras rov 
oXiyajpovvra ^rjpLtovvraSy /cat Trdvrcov hr] rwv /caret ro dorv 
Kadaporrjros t' eVt/xeAeta^at, /cat ottojs Ihicorrjs pLrjhels pirjhev 
rceJi/ rrjs TToXews pir^re olKohopLT^pLacn pnqre ovv opvypiaoiv 

5 eTnXrulierai. /cat hrj /cat vhdrojv rcbv eK Alos evpoias rovrovs 
eTTLpLeXeiadaL XP^^^> '^^^^ ^^^ evros TToXeays rj onoaa e^o) 
TTpeTTOV dv olKelv e'lr]' ravra he Trdvra ovvthovres raXs ;;^/3etats' 

d ol vopLO<f)vXaKes eTnvopioderovvrojv /cat rcbv dXXujv onoaa dv 
6 vopLOS eKXeLTTj] 8t* dTTopiav. ore he ravrd re /cat ra irepl 
dyopdv olKohopLijpLara /cat ra irepl rd yvpLvdoia /cat irdvra 
oaa hihaaKaXela KareaKevaapieva TrepipLevet rovs (jjoirr^ras 

5 /cat Oeards dearpay TTopevcopieda eirl rd /xera rovs ydpLOVSy rrjs 
vopLodealas e^rjs exopievoi. 
KA. Udvv puev ovv. 

A0. TdpLOL piev roivvv jrjpiZv earcjuav yeyovoreSy oj 
KAetvta* 8tatra he irpo iraihoyovLas ovk eXarrcov eviavGias 

e ytyvotr' dv ro /xera rovro, rjv hrj rlva rpoirov XP'^ ^"^^ vvp,(j)iov 

. 188 



N0M12N S" 779 e 

/cat vviJL(l>rjv iv ttoAci Sia</)€ povarj rwv ttoAAcDv iaofjuevrj — to 
Srj Twv vvv €Lpr)fjL€va)v ixofievop — eiTTelv ov Travrajv eu/coAoj- 
rarov, dXXa ovrojv ovk oXlyojv rcjjv efJLTrpoaOev tolovtwVj 
Tovro €TL €K€Lvajv Tcov TToXXcov Svax€p€GT€pov OLTToSex^crdaL 5 
rw TrXridei. to ye (jltju Sokovv opdov /cat aXrjOeg etvat TrdvTCog 
pr]T€ov, <L KAetvta. 

KA. UdvV IJL€V ovv. 

AS. "Oo'Tts' Brj Stavoetrat TroAecrtv aTTO^atVea^at vopLovSt *J^0 
nfj TO, SrjfjLocna /cat kolvol avTOVs XPV ^V^ rrpaTTOVTas, tcov 
§€ ISlojv ogov dvdyKt) fjbrjSe oterat Setv, e^ovoiav Se eKaoTOig 
elvaL TTjv TjjjLepav t,rjv ottcos av ideXrj, /cat pur} iravTa hid 
ra^eois" Seti^ yiyveodat, Trpoepuevo^ Se Ta tSta dvopiodeTrjTa, 5 
T^yetrat ra ye /cotva /cat SrjpLoaia ideXrjoeiv avTOVs Ijjv 8ta 
vopicoVy OVK opdws Stavoetrat. rtvo? Srj X^P^^ raura et/OT^rat; 
TOu8e, OTt (f>'qaopL€v Selv rjpLLV tovs vvpi(f>Lovs pLrjSev 8ta- 

<j)€p6vTOJS pLTjhk TjTTOV iv (TUCTCTtTtOtS' TT^V hlaiTaV TTOL€LodaL b 

Tou 77/90 TcDv ydfiojv XP^^^^ yevopLevov. /cat toOto puev Srj 
davpLaoTOV 6v, 6t€ /car apxo-S rrpcjTOV eyevcTO ev toZs Trap 
vpLLV TOTTOLSy TToXepLOV TLVos avTo, ws y' eLKos, vopLodcTrj- 
aavTOs 7] TLvos €T€pov TTjv avTTjv SvvapLLV €xovTOs rrpaypLaTOs 5 
iv oXiyavOpcoTTLaLs vtto TroXXrjs diropias exop^ivois, yevoa- 
puevoLs Se /cat dvayKaodeZai ;)(/3')^cracr^at rots' ovaoLTLOLs eSo^ev 
/xeya hiacfyipeiv els ocDT'qpiav to vopLipiov, /cat KaTeoTrj Srj C 

TpOTTO) TLvl TOLOVTCp TO imT'qSeVpLa VpUV TO TOJV GVCJOLTLCOV. 

KA. "Eot/ce yovv. 

A0. '^O h-q eXeyoVy oti davpuaoTOV ov tovto ttotc /cat 
<f)o^€p6v CTTtra^at rtatV, vvv ovx opbOLCos tco Trpocxrarroi^rt 5 
Svox^pes dv etry vopLodeTcXv avTO' to S' ^i'^S tovtco, 7T€(f)VKos 
re opdws dv yiyveadai yiyvopLCVoVy vvv re ovSapufj ytyvopievov 
oXtyov [re] ttolovv tov vopbodeTTjVy to tcov irait^ovTCov , els Trvp 
^aiveiv /cat puvpCa ere/aa rotaura dvqvvTa Trovowra Spdv, ov 
pdSiov ovT^ etTretv our' elvovTa diroTeXeXv . d 

KA. Tt St^ tovto y (L ^eVe, ivLX^ipcov Xeyeiv eoLKas acjioSpa 
diTOKveZv; 

A0. 'A/couotr' dvy Lva pLT) ttoXXtj SiaTpi^r) ylyvrjTaL Trepi 
TOVT avTO pLdTTjv. TTov pL€v ydp, oTi7T€p dv Ta^ecus /cat vopLov 5 
p,€T€Xov iv TToAet yiyvrjTaiy rrdvTa dyadd dTrepyd^CTaLy tcjv 
Se dTdKTOJv Tj TCOV KaKcos TaxOivTcov Xv€i ra TroAAa twv ev 
T€TaypL€vcov oAAa erepa. ov 87) /cat vw i<f)€(TT7]K€v Tript, 

189 



5o d nAATftN02 

TO Xeyofievov. v/jllv yap, cL KAetvta /cat MeytAAe, ra /xev Tre/Jt 

e TOV£ dvSpas ovGairia KaXcog afxa Kai, oirep etTTOV, OavfjuaGrcos 

KadearrjKev €k Betas rivos dvdyK7]9, to Se rrepl ra? yvvacKas 

781 ovSafjLOjg opdojs dvofjboOeTrjTov fxedelTai /cat ovk et's" to (f)a)s 

T^/crat TO TTJs (jvaGLTias avTcov e77-tT7^8et»/xa, aXX* S /cat aAAcus" 

yevos rjjjLcov twv dvdpcoTTOJV XadpaioTepov jjuaXXov /cat evrt- 

KXoTTcoTepov €(f)V, TO drjXv, Sid TO dodeveSy ovk opdcbs tovto 

5 ei^avTOs Tov vopuodeTov SvGTaKTOv oV d^et^i^. 8ta Se rourov 

/jLedeLfJievov TToXXd vpulv Trapeppei, ttoXv dpueLvov dv ep^ovra, el 

VOpbOJV €TVX^V, 'Tj TO, VVV OV ydp rjfXlGV fJLOVOV ioTLV, (1)9 

^^h S6^€i€v dv, TO 7T€pl TCts" yvvaZKas dKOGfjuj^TW? TTepiopcxjfJievov , 
oG(i) Se rj BrjXeLa tj^jllv (^vgls €.gtI irpos dpeTrjv ;Yet/06ov ttjs 

Tchv dppivOJV, TOGOVTCp 8ta<^e/9€t TTpOS TO TvXioV Tj SlTrXdGLOV 

etvat. TOVT ovv eTTavaXa^elv Kal €7Tavopdd)GaG6aL Kal TrdvTa 

5 GVPTd^aodat, KOLvfj yvvai^i re /cat dvhpaGLV eTTiTiqhevpiaTa 
jSeArtov rrpos TToXecos evSatpLOVLav vvv 8e ovtojs rJKTaL to 
Twv dvdpcoTTiov yivos ovSapbcos els tovto €VTVX<J^S, (Lgtc ovhe 
fivrjGOrjvai irepl avTov ev dXXois y cgtIv tottols /cat TToXeoiv 

C vovv exovTOS, ottov purjSe GVGGiTia virapxei to Trapdnav 
8e8oy/xeVa /cara ttoXlv elvai, rrodev hrj tLs ye epyco (jltj /cara- 
yeXaGTCOs €7rt;)^et|0')^cret yvvaiKas tt poG^Ldl,€G6 ai ttjv gltcov 
/cat TTOTCov dvdXwGLV (jyavepdv decx)peiGdai; tovtov ydp ovk 

5 eGTiv OTL ;)(;aAe77<j6Te/)ov dv VTropLeiveiev tovto to yevos' 
eWiGfievov ydp SeSvKos /cat gkot€lv6v t^rjVy dyofjievov 8' els 
(/)a>s /8ta TTOLGav dvTiTaGLV avTiTelvov, ttoXv KpaTTjGeL tov 

d vofjLodeTov. TOVT^ ovv dXXodi fieVy birep etirov, ovS* dv tov 
Xoyov vrrofxeiveie tov opdov prjOevTa dvev Trdorfs ^orjs, evddSe 
8e LGOJS dv. el Srj SoKeZ Xoyov y* eveKa pLT) dTvx^ tov Trepi 
Trdorjs rrjs TToXureias yeveodai Xoyov, eOeXoj Xeyeiv (hs 

5 aya^oi^ eart /cat Trpenov, el /cat G<f)a)v avvSoKeZ dKoveiv, et 
€ fjir), eav. 
KA. 'AAA*, c5 ^eve, davfJiaoTCos to ye d/cof/crat vcpv TrdvTOJs 
7TOV ovvSoKel. 

A0. 'A/coua>/xev St]. davpidGr]Te 8e pLrjSev edv vpuv dvco- 

e Oev TTodev eTTLX^tpeiv So^co • GxoXrjs ydp dnoXavofiev /cat ovBev 
Tjixds ecrrt to KaTeTrelyov to firj iravTrj vdvTOJS GKOirelv ra 

TTepl TOVS VOfJLOVS. 

KA. ^Opdcos elprjKas. 
5 A0. ndAtv Toivvv eiTL Td npojTa e77ava;)^a>p7yo'a>/xev 

190 



NOMflN S' 781 e 

Xexd^vra. ev yap Srj to ye roaovrov XPV '^^^'^ dvSpa 
Gvvvoelv, cos r) rcov avdpwTTCJV yeveais 7) to Trapdnav o-pxrjV 
ovhefjiiav e'iXrjx^v ovh^ e^et ttotc y€ TeXevTTjv, aAA tjv re aec 7^2 
/cat euTai ttovtcj?, tj ixrJKos tl ttjs dpx^S OL(f) ov yeyovev 
apLTixavov dv xpovov ooov yeyovos dv elr]. 

KA. Tt fJLT]v; 

A0. Tt ovv; TToXeojv ovoTdaeis /cat (jyOopds, /cat €77t- 5 
TTjSevfjLaTa TravTota Td^ecvs re /cat dra^tas", /cat ^pcooeojs, /cat 
TTCjpidTiov T€ dfxa /cat ^pcufjLdTOJV eTTt^u/XTy/xara TravToSaTrd, 
TrdvTOJs /cat Tre/ot rrdaav ttju yrjv dp^ ovk olofieda yeyoveVat, 
/cat GTpo(f)ds wpdjv TTavToias, iv at? ra ^a)a /xera^aAAetv 
auTcov TTafjLTrXrjdeLs /xera^oAas" et/cos"; b 

KA. ricos" ya/3 OL'; 

A0. Tt ouv; TTLGTevofjiev dfXTreXovs re (f)avrjvaL ttov ttotc 
TTpoTepov OVK ovGas ; wGavrcos Se /cat iXdas /cat to. ArjjjbrjTpos 
T€ /cat KdpT^s' haypa; TpnrToXefJLOv re rtva roiv TOtouroji^ 5 
yevecBai hiaKOvov; ev co Se fjurj Tavra rjv Ttio XP^^^> P'djv 
OVK olofieda ra ^a)a, Kaddirep vvv, eirl ttjv dXXijXcuv iSojSrjv 
TpeiTeadai ; 

KA. Tt /LtTyv; 

A0. To 8e /XT^v ^ueti^ dvOpojirovs dXXrjXovs ert /cat vw c 
napafxevov opdyfiev ttoXXols' /cat rouvavrtov aKovofxev ev 
dXXoLSi oT€ ouSe jSoos" eToXfXiti^f jiev yeveadau, dvpLara re oz)/c 
i^y TOt? deoLOL ^oia, jreXavot Sc /cat /xeAtrt Kapnol SeSeu/xeVot 
/cat ToiavTa dXXa dyvd dvfjLaTa, aapKcov 8 arreixovTO cos ovx 5 
OGLOV ov eGdUiv ouSe rous" tcDp' ^ecov ^cufjLovs alpLari /xtatvetv, 
aAAa Op</>t/cot Ttv€? Aeyo/xei^ot ^tot eyiyvovTO rjfjLOJV tols 
Tore, dipvxcov /xev exopievoi TrdvTOJv, ipn/jvxojv 8e roui^avrtov 
TTavrojv arrexofJievoL. d 

KA. Kat G(f)68pa XeyojjLevd t* eiprjKas /cat 7nGT€V€G6aL 
TTiBavd. 

A0. ripos ow St) Tt Tavra, eliroi tls dv, vpXv iravr 
eppijOrj ra vvv; 5 

KA. ^OpdctJs VTTeXa^es, cL ^eve. 

A0. Kat roivvVy idv SvvcofjLaL, ra tovtols ^i'^9, c5 KAeti^ta, 
TTCLpdoofiaL <j)pdt,eLV. 

KA. Aeyots" ai^. 

A0. 'Opoj TTavra tols dvdpojTTOis e/c rpLTrrjs ;)(/oetas' /cat 10 
eTTidvpLLas rjpTTjpueva, St' cSv dpcTry re auTOts" dyofievoLS opdcjjs 

191 



782 e nAATI2N02 

e Kal rovvavTiov arroPaivei KaKcos axB^laiv. ravra 8' icrrlv 

iScjoSrj jLtev Kal ttoo-i? €vdv9 yevofxevois, t^v iripi aTraorav ttoLv 

t,a>ov €fJL(f)vrov epcora e;^ov, fxearov olarpov re Igtlv koL 

avrjKOVGTias rod Xeyovros dXXo tl Selv Trpdrreiv ttXtjv ras" 

5 rjSovds Kal iTndvfjbias rds irepl aTravra ravra aTTOTrXrjpovvra, 

XvTTTjs rrjg aTrdurjs aet heXv a^ds aTraXXdrretv rplrrj 

7^3 ^^ 'qpi'iv Kal fjueyiarrrj X/3€ta Kal €paj9 o^vraros vcrrarog 

fiev oppbdraiy ScaTTvpojrdrovs Se rovs dvdpcoTrovs fxaviaLS 

a7T€pydt,€rai Trdvrcos, 6 rrepl rrjv rod yivovs arropdv v^pei 

TrXetarr] Kao/jLcvos. d St) Set rpia voarjixara, rpirrovra els 

•"5 ro ^iXrLGrov Trapd ro Xeyofxevov rjSiGrov, rpcal fjuev rols 

fxeyiGroLs TTeLpdaOai Kare-)(€iv, <l>6^ip Kal vofxcp Kal rep dXrjdet 

Xoycp, 7rpoaxpci)fJL€VOVs fMevroi Moucrats' re Kal dycovioiaL 

b deoZs, a^€vvv>fai rrjv av^rjv re Kal eTnpporjv. 

Yiai^iov he Sr) yevecnv fxerd roys ydjjbovs 6ojpL€V, Kal 

p^erd yiveuLV rpo(f)r)v Kal Traiheiav Kal rd^ dv ovrcu 

rrpo'Covrcov rojy Xoyojv o re v6p,os rjp,tv eKaaros rrepalvoiro 

5 <!)(; rovpLTTpoadev eirl uvacrir la rjVLKa dcfyLKopueda — ras roi- 

avras Koivcovias eire dpa yvvaiKcov elre dvhpdjv Set piovcov 

yiyvecjdai, Trpoap^ei^avres avrols eyyvdev lgcos /xaAAov Karo- 

ipopieBa — rd re eTrLirpoGdev avrcov, en vvv ovra dvopLO- 

C derrjra, rd^avres avrd eTTiTrpoGBev TTOirjaopieda, Kal oirep 

epprjdr] vvvhrj, Karoifjopiedd re avrd dKpi^earepoVy pidXXov 

re rovs TTpOGrjKOvras avrols Kal irpeirovras vopuovs dv 

Beirjpiev. 

5 KA. ^OpOorara Xeyeis. 

A0. OfAa^cD/xev roivvv rfj pLvqpir] rd vvvBr) Xe^Bevra' 
Xgojs yap ;\;/3etav ttot* avrcov Travrcov e^opuev. 
KA. Ta TTola Srj SiaKeXevr); 

A0. *^A rots rpiGl SicopL^opLeda pTjpiaGf ^pwGiv pbev 
lo eXeyopuev rrrov, Kal Sevrepov TTOGtVy Kal d(f>poBLGLa)v Be riva 
d SLairrorjGLV rpirov. 

KA. Yidvrojs, cS ^eve, pLepLvr^Gopiedd vov <ojv> rd vvv 
SiaKeXevT). 

A0. KaAcus*. eXdcopbev S' errl rd vvpL(f)LKdy SiBd^ovres re 
5 avroifs ttws XPV '^^^ riva rpoirov rovs rralhas Trotetcr^at, Kal 
edv dpa pur) TreidcDpiev, aTreiXij Govres riGiv vopLots. 
KA. Ua>s; 

A0. Nvpi^Tjv xp^ BiavoeiGdai Kal vvp.<j>iov d)s on KaX- 

192 



N0M12N 5" 783 d 

AtWous" Kal apidTOVs €L£ Svva/JLLV airohei^opLevovs TTalSag rfj 
TToAet. TToivTes S dvOpcoTTOL KOLvojvoL ivdcnqs TTpd^ecos, TjVLKa e 
fjL€v dv TTpoorexojGLV avTOis T€ Kal rfj irpd^ei rov vovVy irdvTa 
KoKd Kal dyadd dnepyd^ovTaL, jultj TTpoorexovre^ 8e t] fjLTj 
€XOVT€s vovv, rdvavTia. irpoaex'^TOJ Srj Kal 6 vvjX(f)Los rfj re 
vvfjLcfyrj Kal rfj TraiSoTTOua rov vovv, Kara ravrd 8e Kal rj 5 
vufJL(f)7j, rovTOV rov xpovov Zia^epovrojs ov dv jxrjTno TratSes 
avroL^ wGiV yeyovores. eTriaKOTTOi S ecrrojaav rovrojv as 784 
elXofJLeda yvvaiKeSy TrXeiovs elr^ iXdrrovs, roXs dpxovatv 
OTTOcras dv Soktj Trpoararreiv re /cat oirorav, irpos to rrjs 
EtAet^utas" lepov eKdarrjs rjijuepas cruXXey 6 fxevai fiexpt rptrov 
liepovs cjpas, ot Srj avXXexQe'laai hiayyeXXovrajv oXXrjXaLs 5 
el ris riva Spa irpos dXX drra ^Xeirovra dvSpa rj Kal yvvaiKa 
rcx)v TTaLSoTTOLovfievcov rj rrpos rd reraypLeva vtto rdjv ev rots 
ydpLOLS dvcTLcov re Kal lepcov yevop,ev(x)v. rj Be rraihoTToda b 
Kal (j)vXaK'rj ra>v TTaLSorroLovpLevcov SeKerts earo), purj TrXeLOJ Se 
Xpovov, orav evpoia fj rrjs yeveaecos' dv he dyovoi rives 
els rovrov. yiyvcuvr ai rov xP^^^^t puerd rcov oiKeicov Kal 
dpxovacov yvvaiKcov Sia^evyvvadaL Kouvfj ^ovXevopuevovs els 5 
rd 7Tp6G(f)opa eKarepoLS. eav S dpL^LG^rjrrjGis ns ytyvrjrat 
rrepl rcov eKarepois TrpeTTOvrojv Kal rrpoacfjopcoVy Se/ca rojv 
vopLO<f)vXdKajv eXopLevovs, ols dv emrpei/jcoGLV ol 6^ rd^ojai, C 
rovrois epLpbevetv. elaiovoai 8 els ras" olKias rctjv veojv at 
yvvauKes, rd pikv vovderovaaL, rd he Kal dTTeiXovaai, 
TTavovrojv avrovs rrjs dpuaprias Kal dpLadlas' edv S* aSu- 
varcoGL, TTpos rovs vopLO(J)vXaKas lovaai (f)pa^6vra)V, ol S' 5 
elpyovrcov. dv he Kal eKeZvoi ttcos dhwarijaajGL, rrpos to 
hrjpLoacov d7TOcf)r]vdvrajv , avaypdifiavres Te Kal opuoGavres 
7^ pLrjv dhwarelv rov Kal rov ^eXrioj rroielv. 6 he dvaypa<f)els cl 
dnpLos eGTOj, purj cAcov ev hiKaGrr^picp rovs eyypdipavras, 
rojvhe' pLrjre ydp els ydpLOVs trcu pui^re els rds rcov rraihcov 
eTTLreXeccoGeLSt dv he trj, rrXrjyats 6 ^ovXr]dels dda>os avrov 
KoXat^erco . rd avrd he /cat rrepl yvvaiKos eGrco vopapLa' rcov 5 
e^ohcov ydp rcov yvvaiKeiojv Kal ripLcov Kal rcov els rovs 
ydpuovs Kal yeveOT^ia <rcov> naihcov cf)OLriJGea}v pur) puerexerco, 
edv aKOGpovGa coGavrcos avaypa<f>jj Kal purj eXrj rrjv hiKrjv. C 
orav he hrj nathas yevv-qGcovrat Kard vopLOvs, edv dXXorpia 
ns rrepl rd roiavra KOLvcovfj ywat/ct r) yvvrj dvhpl, edv puev 
TTathoTTOLOvpievoLs 6Tt, rd avrd em^'qpLLa avrots ecrrco 
VOL. I 193 o 



rS^e nAATONOS NOMftN 5" 

5 KaBaTTcp rolg ere yewcofievotg etprjraL' fjuera Se ravra 6 
fjL€V aa)(f)povcov Kal craxjipovovcja els ra roiavra eoroj Tvavra 
evhoKLfJios , 6 Se rovvavriov ivavriojs TLfjudo-Oa), pidXXov 8e 
drt/xa^eCT^co. kol fxerpLa^ovrcov fiev irepl ra roiavra rwv 
785 TrXetovcov dvofJLoderrjTa <Ji^yfj Keiadco, aKoapiovvriDV Se 
vo/JLoderrjOevra ravrj] Trparriudoj Kara rovs rore redevras 
vofJLovg. ^Lov fxkv OLPX'"] "Tov TTavros e/caarots" o irpwros 
iviavros' ov yeypdchOai ;^pecov iv lepoZoi TrarpcpoLs ^coTys" 

5 OLpx"^' Kopw Kal KopTj 7Tapay€ypdcf)9ci) 8' iv roix^ AeAeu- 

KCxjfjLevw iv Trdafi (jiparpia rov dpidpLOv tcjv dp^ovrcov rcov 

*w iirl ToZs €T€GLV d/Dt^/xoy/xeVcuv rrjs Se ^parptas" del rovs 

b i,a)VTas fxev yeypd^Oai ttXtjulov, rovs 8' VTreKxo^povvrag 
rov ^Lov i^aX€L(f)€LV. ydjjiov Se opov etvat Kopj] }ikv 
dTTo eACAcatSe/ca ircjv els et/cocrt, rov jxaKporarov XP^^^^ 
dcfyojpLGfJLevov, Kopcp Se dno rpidKovra p^expt^ twv Trevre Kal 

5 rptdKovra' els Se dpxds yvvaiKl ixev rerrapdKovra, dvhpl Se 
TpidKOvra err)' Trpos TroXefMov Se dvSpl fxev e'lKoai piexpt' tojv 
e^rJKOvra irwv yvvaiKl Se, tjv dv SoKjj ;^/oetW Setv ;^/)7ycr^at 
Trpos Ta TToXefxiKdy eTretSdv TratSas" yevvriarj, to SvvaTOV Kal 
TTpeTTOV eKduTais TTpoGTaTTeiv jJ^expi' tcov TrevTi^KovTa ercuv. 



194 



NOTES 



NOTES 

BOOK I 

The Dramatis Personae. Lacedoenion and Crete were famous for 624 a 
their codes. Hence the appropriateness of the nationality of the 
two inferior members of the committee. The Athenian philosopher 
who propounds a new code must not be supposed to disregard what 
had already been done in that line. Besides, Doric institutions, 
having more of positive enactment, and greater interference with 
the liberty of the subject, present, to Plato's view, a better 
starting-point, for a consideration of the whole matter, than would 
those of his own country. 

624^1. iiX-qcpe TTjv alriav Trj<s twv vojjlcdv Sta^ecrecus, "has the 
credit of your legal arrangements." Cp. Rep. 599 e ere Se rts 
aiTiarat ttoAis vo/JLoOerr^v dyadov yeyovcvat ; 

a 3. ws ye TO StKaioTttToi' etVetv, "most decidedly." 

a 4. irapa fxkv rjfxiv Zevs, . . . 'AnoWiova : this sentence is 
typical of many in the Laws. A gentle anacoluthon is brought in 
to heighten the effect of variety. Two strands, so to speak, of the 
thread are intact, the third is broken. We shall often find a more 
violent rupture. For an excellent characterization of the style of 
the Laivs cp. Apelt, " Zu Platos Gesetzen," Beigabe zur Jahresh. 
a. d. Gymn. G.-A. zu Jena^ 1907, pp. 1 ff. 

a 7. KaO' "OfXTjpov : r 179. Cp. Minos 319 c 5 ff. — For ws with 
an absolute construction after a verbum declarandi cp. below 
626 e 4, 636 dl, 644 b 6 and Rep. 470 e Kal Siavoela-daL w? 
8taAA.ayr^(ro/xevwv Kal ovk dei 7roA.€/z7ycroi/T(ov. Lobeck, on Soph. 
Aj. 281, traces the genesis of this not uncommon anacoluthon from 
such a construction as Laws 964 a Sta voou cos €/dwv. 

b 2. </)>//x7; is a solemn word (cp. 664 d 4) — properly used of the 
utterance of a god. 

b 5. (XKov€T(. : for the tense cp. Gorg. 503 c, and y 193 'Ar/aeiSryv 

197 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Se Kol avTol dKov€T€ v6(T<f)LV €ovT€9, oj« T ■^X6\ We USB the 
(habitual) present tense of the verbs read, to he told, learn, notice, 
and find in the same way. 

625 a 3. For the superfluous avroi/ cp. Gorg. 482 d 2, Tim. 28 a 8. 
(Riddell, Digest § 223.) 

a 5. €v roLovToa ijde(rL vo^tKots : tolovtols does not, of course, 
qualify vofxiKOLs as our such in the sense of so might, nor is 
vo/jiLKOi<s, as Stallbaum says, epexegetic of tolovtols ; but the two 
words yjdea-L voixlkols go closely together, and tolovtois, which 
qualifies them both, gets from its context a complimentary shade 
of meaning — " among legal institutions (lit. " in law - bred 
habits ") of so distinguished an origin " (or " character "). Cf. 
751 c9 reOpdcpOai ev yjOecrt vofxayv €v TreTratSev/xcvofS. 

a 6. TrpoorSoKO) ovK dv (XTySws . . . TTOLijcraa-OaL, " I fancy you 
would not find law and government an unpleasant subject of con- 
sideration now, supposing we discoursed to each other about it as 
we walk." There is no need for the i^/xas which L and insert 
after drjSios. The only suggestion that the Athenian would bear 
a part in the discussion is made modestly by the word dKovovras. 
The exceptional advantages enjoyed by the Cretan and the Spartan 
in the matter of law are urged as a reason why they would enjoy 
a talk about it : if rj/xds stood as the subject of SLarptfSrjv 
TTOLiqa-acr 6 ai, it would be a suggestion that the Athenian too was 
an authority on the subject. This he does not make. 

b 1. TroiTja-eo-Oai MSS., TroLrjaracrOai Schanz. — irdvTios 5', 
"there is no doubt that ..." Cp. Symp. 173 b 6. 

b 2. o)? aKovofxev, " if my information is correct." 

b 3. ti)s etKo?, "we are sure to find." — irvtyovs ovtos to, vvv, 
*' ut par est in hoc aestu " Stallbaum. 

b 6. ovTiii jxcTo. pacrTij^vrjs : cp. (xttAws ovtws 633 c 9, ovTii) 
TTtvovTas Trpos Yjoov-qv Symp. 176 e. 

C 3. 6p6o)<s Aeyei?, " a good suggestion ! " 

C 3-6. The division between the persons of the dialogue given 
here is that of the MSS. Schanz and others have made various 
alterations in it, for the worse, I think. 

C 6. ravT €ir), "be it so." Cp. Rep: 349 c 10 ea-TL ravra. — 
Kara rt ; cp. Aesch. P.V. 226 6 8' ovv kpiaTaT, atriav Ka0' rjVTiva 
aLKL^erai /xe, tovto Srj (ra(fi7jVL(j}, Gorg. 482 d Kal eywye Kar' ai'ro 
TOVTO OVK dyajxaL IIwAov, otl <tol (TVV€)(^u)prjcr€ to dSiKetv at(r^iov 
etVat Tov dSiKelo'Oai. 

C 7. rrjv Tiov oVAwi/ e^tv : not "the practice of carrying arms," 
but, as the scholiast says, aTrAw? ottAio-iv, "your accoutrement," 

198 



NOTES TO BOOK I 625 c 

" the sort of arms you usually have." The Cretan's answer 
explains, not why Cretans carry arms, but why their distinctive 
weapons are bows and arrows. For the periphrasis cp. Tim. 73a 
ry Tov 7r€pty€vyj(TOfjLevov Trw/xaTOS eBecrfxaTO'i re c^€t for tw 
7r€pLy€vr](T0fX€V(i) TTiojxaTL Koi iSio-fxaTij and 74 a tyjv 8 av rrjs 

C 10. TO. y]fx€T€pa, "our institutions," not "our local conditions." 
d 3. Trpos Tr^v Twv 7r€^rj SpofjuDV a(rKrj(TLV : Cleinias answers the 
second of the Athenian's three questions first, then the third, then 
the first. — Running was the main exercise in the Cretan 
gymnasia, which, according to Suidas, were called Spofjiot. So 
Stallbaum, who is doubtless right in taking 'ixovTa to be 
masculine. 

e 5. avotav ktX. : as we might say, " Minos's legislation is a 
witness to the folly of the nations who have no such institutions 
(and who thereby show that) they are blind to the fact that war is 
always at the door." I would put a full stop (instead of a colon) 
after TroAet?. 

e 8. Kttt Ttvas apxovTa<i ktX., " and that relays of men and 
officers should act as sentinels for them." 

626 a 1. 8LaK€KO(Tixr)fji€vovs eti/at : to be taken closely together as 
perf. infin. paas. 

a 4. oLKrjpvKTov: not here = acTTTovSos, but (as Stallbaum) merely 
'' though it may not have been duly proclaimed (it is its natural 
state)." The scholiast says "needing no herald to prepare the 
people for it." 

a 7. Kara ravra ovtw, "just with this view (he bade us 
keep them)." Cp. the Kara ri of 625 c 6, to which this is an 
answer. 

b 1. u)5 . . . Kparrj tis, " in the belief, i.e., that no peaceable 
possession or pursuit" (aAAwi/ means other than the equipment 
and practice of war) " would do any good to men who did not 
manage to win their battles." 

b 4. yiyvicrBai : Stallbaum cps. the same inf. following ws with 
gen. abs. at Charmides 164 d ws tovtov p.€v ovk opdov ovtos tov 
TrpocrpTJixaTO<; tov yaipav, ov8\ 8eiv tovto TrapaKcXevea-dai. 

b 5. yeyvfjLvaxrdaL ktX., " your training at all events has fitted 
you to discern the nature of the Cretan institution." The word 
yeyvfjivdcrdai is used with a jocular reference to the above- 
mentioned gymnasia. It is a polite way of saying " you are very 
ready with your answer." 

b 7. ov yap opov Wov ktA., i.e. " the criterion of the 

199 



26 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

excellence of a state's institutions is their suitability for ensuring 
victory in war over other states." Cp. opov dkix^vos 739 d. 

C 4. The scholiast says this reply is quite Laconic in style. 
^€tos is a favourite Sj)artan epithet of praise ; only it should, in 
strict dialect, be a-elos. 

C 6-d, 2. With this description of life as a fight we may compare 
H. G. Wells, New Worlds for Old, p. 218, "Human nature is 
against human nature. For human nature is in a perpetual con- 
flict ; it is the Ishmael of the universe, against everything, and 
with everything against it ; and within, no more and no less than 
a perpetual battleground of passion, desire, cowardice, indolence 
^ and goodwill." It will be observed that Plato insists, as he 
develops this idea, that the narrower the field of conflict, the 
nobler the characteristics which are required to bring the fight to 
the right conclusion. 

d 1. Ast takes avr(x tt/oo? auroi' ae parallel to the two previous 
datives followed by Trpo? c. ace, i.e. governed by ravrov opdov 
€<TTL understood ; but it seems better, with Stallbaum, to take 
auTw as dat. agentis wdth StavoijTeov. We are thus brought to 
the self-conscious standpoint. 

d 2. ALO have y) ttw? €tl Aeyw/^ev ; all modern editors sub- 
stitute the Xeyofxev of Eus. and A^ and Vat. 1029 for Aeyw/xev. 
Herm. joins >) ttojs ; to the previous sentence, and proceeds rt 
keyofxiv ; 

d 4. T'^s Oeov . . . €7rovofJLd^€cr6aL : for this attraction of what, 
in a simpler form of expression, would be the object of the 
dependent infin. into the case governed by the word on which 
the infin. depends, St. quotes many parallels: e.g. Gorg. 513 e 
€Triy€Lpi)T€ov karl ry TroXei Oepaireveiv. Other cases are Eep. 416 a 
€7r L\€iprj(raL tol'^ rrpo/SaTOiS KaKovpyeiVj Laws 700 c 1 t6 Se Kvpos 
TovTiov yviovat re kol ayw.a yvovTa SiKacrai : the infin. thus 
becomes epexegetical. 

d 8. Ast and Schanz follow the " apographum Vossianum " in 
inserting koI before eKacrroi'?, and Stallbaum approves, though he 
does not (in his 1859 edition) print the kol. Burnet does not 
accept the Kal but puts a comma after t€. The reading with the Kal 
is easier. The speaker simply re-enumerates the three contests 
mentioned above — between communities, between individuals, and 
between our two selves, so to speak. I would, however, follow 
Burnet, because I think that the author here intends to direct 
special attention to his following subject, i.e. the contest between 
the worse and the better self, and, to lead up to that, divides all 

200 



NOTES TO BOOK I 626 d 

contests into two classes : (1) those fought in public (8rjfxo(TL<}) and 
(2) those fought in the privity of a man's own consciousness. It is 
hard to see how the kol before ^koxttovs could drop out, because, 
at first sight, it gives such a satisfactory sense. The same reason 
makes it easy to believe that somebody inserted it. 

e 2. KOLvravOa, " and in that very war." CI. has just said that 
life is a fight. (This is better, I think, than "and just that 
victory," i.e. " the victory over oneself") 

e 4. Tavra : i.e. this talking about victory and defeat. — For the 
construction cp. above on 624 a 7. 

e 6. dvaa-rpixl/wfieVj i.e. " let us go backwards from the indi- 
vidual to the state." 

627 a 9. TQ roiavTrj vlkyj : cp. Dinarchus iii. 9 {"/vtei? /xev 
Trapa Tratrtv dvOpwTroi'i kiraivilddc rais y^yiviqpLivaLS ^rjT-qo-ea-LV. 

b 1. The TO (before fxev tolvvv) goes with the el clause. — The 
paradoxical nature of the idea of self -conquest , where both 
combatants are self — which Plato forbears to notice here (cp. also 
c 8) — he has pointed out at Rep. 430 ef. (cp. also Gorg. 489 c). 
He is more concerned here to hint at a more serious error in 
popular thought, i.e. that of supposing that the really superior 
could ever become in any sense inferior. 

b 5. ^ovXovixevoi : conative. 

C 1. droirov : the scholiast points out that the apparent 
absurdity springs from the twofold sense of the word K/aetTTOj/, 
which is a name not only for to /^cAtiov but also for to 
€7r L K par ecTTepov. 

c'3. €X€ Srji see on 639 d 2. 

C 8. 01) irpknov {r]pAv\ "not our business." 

C 9. dyp€V€Lv : used in the same sense as StwKctv at Rep. 454 a 
KttT avTO TO ovofia SuoKetv tov \€x6evT0<s Trjv evavTcoxTLV. Cp. 
also the use of 1)(^v€V€lv at 654 e and Farm. 128 c, — " to hunt after 
a notion." At Gorg. 489 b Plato uses the fuller phrase ovo/xara 
Brfpevetv (aucupari verba), and Boeckh (quite unnecessarily) 
proposed to read here ev TovT(p ovofiara d-qpeveiv. Badham 
proposes to take oVt as the neut. of ocms, i.e. (" it is not our 
business to inquire) wherein lies the victory or the defeat " (which 
would be said to put the worse above the better, or vice versa). 
But this is no criticism of the ordinary way of speaking, and 
deprecation of verbal criticism is what the context demands. 

d 1 ff. " The object of our present examination of ordinary 
language is not to find what is proper or improper as an expression, 
but to find what is naturally right or wrong as law." I think 

201 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

« 

cTKOirovfjieOa 7rp6<s should be taken closely together, like a- KOTreicr 6 ai 
eU in Eur. Med. 1166, in the sense of examine. Cp. below, 
645 d 7r/9os ri Se (tkottovix^vos avro eTrave/owr^s ; and Re'p. 
589 c TT/ads re yap rjSovrjv kol Trpos evSo^iav koI oycji^XeLav 

(TKOTTOVfieViO . . . 

d 4. (f>v(r€L may be translated by putting the adj. " essential " 
with the nouns " Tightness and wrongness." 

d 6. cos ye e/xot (rvvSoKeiv : Gorg. 482 d ws y' efxol 8ok€lv, Meno 
81 a efxoi ye SoKeiv, Euthyd. 273 a e/xot SoKetv ; St. cps. Ar. Plut. 
736 W9 ye jxot SoKei. 

d 8. ToSe : the Athenian's next point is that the dissentients 
would not, in a civilized community, be left to themselves. There 
are tribunals which would set bounds to the fighting instinct. 
Thus he leads his audience round to the consideration that there 
are other things for laws to do besides getting men into fighting 
order. See 628 a 6. We must bear it in mind that the investi- 
gation of the Cretan and Spartan institutions here begun is not, as 
some have thought, meant to be the main business of the book, 
even at startfng. From the first the author intended the 
deficiencies of the two systems to serve as an introduction to the 
philosophy of law and a philosophical code. 

dllff. There are two difficulties in this speech: (1) eKovra? 
in e 3, and (2) Tpirov irpos aper-qv. (Cp. 739 a f. r-qv dpia-TTjv 
TToXiTecav KOL Sevrepav kol TpiTrjv . . . elwovTes o-perrj Trpcorr/v 
TroXiTeiav kol Sevrepav kol rpiT-qv.) The latter expression seems 
at first sight to mean the third in excellence, but it is evident 
that both speaker and hearers at once see that the third kind of 
judge would be far more useful than either of the others. Jowett 
translates "-a-— third — exeellent~~-^j«dge," apparently taking tt/do? 
dpeT7]v as if it were a qualification of SiKacrTrjv. The question 
may even be asked, could tt/dos dper-qv possibly mean par 
excellence ? I think it is best to suppose that the speaker, 
taking it for granted that everyone would see that his second 
judge was better than his first, uses rpiros in the sense of third 
in an ascending scale. Three was held by the Greeks to be a lucky 
number (cp. Soph. O.G. 8, O.T. 581, Aesch. Sum. 759, Soph. 
fragm. 389 with Nauck's note, Find. Isth. vi. 10), and rpiros had none 
of the associations of our third-rate. Hence rptros Trpbs uper-qv here 
means more excellent than either of the other two. (Cp. 717 c 2 ff.) 

The former difficulty is a greater one. Wherein, if we read 
eKovra?, lies the superiority of the third judge ? Kitter says no 
satisfactory answer can be found to this question, and reads 

202 



NOTES TO BOOK I 627 d 

ttKovras. There is much to be said for this, but I think the 
MS. reading is correct. Judge number two secures that the 
majority should submit themselves voluntarily to the rule of the 
few (indeed it is hard to see how he could do it if they did not 
agree). The superior wisdom of No. 3 is shown in this, that for 
the personal rule of the minority he substitutes a code of laws. 
When both sides recognize the authority of this code they are 
more likely to remain friends than when it was a question of 
personal rule. There is something in the form of the description 
of the third judge that confirms this view. In this description 
there is a manifest reference to the shortcomings of the other two. 
— No. 3 does not (like No. 1) put anyone to death ; he does 
reconcile them (like No. 2), but he does more. This reference to 
No. 2's action, which may be seen in the word 8taAAa^as, will 
not be there if we read aKovras, for then there will be no real 
reconciliation in the second case. — The friendly relation resulting 
in the third case implies that the majority see that it is their own 
interest to obey the laws. 

628 a 1. I insert a comma after StaXXd^as Se, to emphasize 
the connexion of €ts tov kTrlXonrov ^povov with Trapa<j)V- 
XdrreLv. Judge No. 3 not only brings about a reconciliation, 
but cements it by the laws he lays down to govern future 
action. As Cleinias says, he is not merely ScKaa-T-qs, he is 
vofxodeTTjs as well. The three optatives aTroXeoreuv in d 11 (with 
7r/3oa-Ta^€t€v), av 7rot7;o-€t€v, and (ZTroAco-eiev in e 5 (with SvvatTo) 
subtly vary the form of phrase, and deserve attention, aTroXecreiev 
in d 11 is like the assimilated opt. at Ar. Nuh. 1251 ovk av diroSoLrjv 
ovS' dv 6/3oXov ovSevl | oa-Tis Kokiaeie KdpSoTrov tyjv KapSonr^v, 
i.a we should supply dv €Lrj with dfxeivajv ; av TrotT^tretcv has the 
form of the apodosis of a conditional sentence with which we may 
supply " if occasion offered." aTroAeo-eiev again in e 5 is opt. by 
assimilation to ctV;. — Other slight peculiarities of expression which 
give a special flavour to the passage are fiyjre (e 5) followed by 
Se (see 649 b 5), and the 7rapa<f>vXdTT€iv wcrre eiVat (ficXovs, " to 
secure that they should be friends," for the simple " to make them 
friends" (vrpos dXXi^Xov^; goes with <f)iXov<s). — It is a question 
whether we ought not to put a ; after <f>LXov<s. 

a 6. TovvavTLov rf Trpos TroAe/iov : not only is the lawgiver in 
this case not looking towards war when making his laws, but 
he is looking exactly in the opposite direction : he is trying 
to make peace. 

a 9. Trpos TToXe/xov avTrjs ktX. : though we have seen that a 

203 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

lawgiver sometimes looks towards peace, there is a sense in which 
he may be said to be looking towards a war in which his state may 
be involved : but it is civil, not foreign war, and it is with a view 
of avoiding it, not of making one side efficient fighters, that he 
makes his laws. For the distinction between crTa<Tts and -jroXe/xos 
cp. Rep. 470 bff. The phrases 6 rrjv ttoXlv (rvvapfioTTOJv and tov f^tov 
avTTJs Ko(Tjji€LV tlirow light on Plato's views as to the function of the 
lawgiver. The former contains the same metaphor as is used by 
St. Paul at Col. 2. 19 of the Christian community : tyjv Ke^aX-qv^ 
€^ ov Trav TO (r(o/xa Sua twv d^wv kol crvrSecr/xwv kiri^opriyovixevov 
Kut (TV^^i^atyOfxevov av^et rr^v av^rjcTLV tov deov. For the 
latter cp. Eur. Cycl. 339 where the Cyclops, an enemy to law, 
speaks of lawgivers as 7roLKiX.X.ovTes dvdpioTriov /3tov. 

b 6. elprjvriv crTacrews : Plato allows himself to use the same 
gen. with etprjvri at Rep. 329 c TravTaTracn yap rcov ye TouovTiov 
ev Tw yrjp^ TToXkr) elpijvrj yiyverac Kal eXevOepia. In our passage 
the expression is made less strained by the nearness of aTraAAar- 
T€(rdaL used of the same a-rao-t?, and in the latter passage by the 
addition of iXevOepta to elp-jv-r]. (Ast wants to read €k ttJs a-rao-ews, 
and Stallbaum, reproving Ast, tells us that the gen. goes with 
Se^aiTO /xaAAoi/, and is equal to rj crTao-tv.) It seems strange to us 
that the definite tre/owv should precede the indefinite Trorkpiav ; 
the English form would be : " that, after the victory of one or the 
other party, the other should be put to death." All through the 
speech the gen. abs. clauses contain, as Stallbaum says, the primaria 
notio. For Trorepiov cp. 673 b 7, 914 d. Charm. 171 b, Phil. 20 e. 
Rep. 499 c, 509 a, Theaet. 145 a, Soph. 252 a. 

b 9. Though long inclined with Schanz to bracket dvdyKrjv eluai 
— indeed I suspected the words before I knew that he did — I have 
now decided to follow Burnet in keeping them. It must be 
remembered that the infinitive depends on ^e^atr dv. The question 
resolves itself into : " under which of the two circumstances would 
you prefer to be forced to turn your attention to a foreign foe ? " 
{dvdyK7jv elvai is therefore the equivalent of " when so compelled.") 

C 6. TOV dpla-Tov €V€Ka : here is slipped in, as if it were a 
commonplace, the root of Plato's philosophy of law ; it is not, in 
his eyes, so much a means of repressing evil, as a means of produc- 
ing good. 

C 10. direvKTov 8e to 8€7]67]vaL tovtojv : parenthetical, " these 
are things which we should pray to be spared " ; lit. " the need- 
ing til em is to be deprecated." 

d 1. ovK rjv ktA. : the past tense contains a reference to their 

204 



NOTES TO BOOK I 

previous conversation on the subject : " the victory which we were 
talking about comes under the head of things necessary, not of 
things that are best : " — a variety of the so-called " philosophic 
imperfect." 

d 2 ff . ofjLoiov (OS €t . . . (j}(TavTiD<5 Si i the simile is not drawn 
out in regular form, but the meaning all through is perfectly clear. 
It is implied, but not said, that it is a mistake to be so deeply 
interested in the cure of a malady as to forget that it is better not 
to have had a malady to cure. We shall meet the same medical 
metaphor in another connexion below at 646 c. 

d 6. In TToAiTiKos opOioSf followed by voiJio6€Tr]<s aKpLJSrjsy we see 
again the characteristic preference for variety of expression. The 
style of the Laws is loose, and at times almost dreamy, but the 
thought is definite and clear. — aKpi(ir]<i is used of a vofxoOerrjs as 
at Rep. 342 d of an larpos — -perfect (in his art). 

d 7. dTrofSXeiriov is epexegetic of Siavoovpievos ovtio. 

e 1. Twv TToAe/xtKwi/ €V€Ka TO, ttJs ilprqvTjs : thus the Athenian 
has brought round the argument to a condemnation of Cleinias's 
interpretation of the root notion of the Dorian institutions. Cp. 
below -803 d 3 tf . 

e 3. Oav/jid^u) . . . el . . . fiTj, " I am much mistaken if (they 
have) not." For the same idiom in a past tense cp. Aristoph. Pax 
1292 rj yap iyo) ' davfia^ov olkovidv el crv fxr] ecr^s dvSpos (^ovKopLa^ov 
KOL K\av(TLixd^ov Tivbs vlos. For dav/xd^u) el in the sense of I am 
surprised if cp. Prot. 349 c ov yap dv davjxd^oijxi el Tore diroTreL- 
poifxevos fxov ravrd ttws eAeyes. 

629a 1. rd)^ dv i(T(D<s, "that is quite likely." — Hermann, the 
Ziirich edition, Schanz and Burnet adopt Bekker's emendation of 
the MS. avTov<i to avrois. Stallbaum stands by the MS. reading. 
" Sed libri omnes mordicus tenant accusativum. Atque is sane 
defensionem utcunque paratam habet. Pendet enim non ex verbo 
proximo, sed potius ex remotiore dvepwrdv." I do not agree 
with St.'s interpretation, but I think that the MS. reading does 
admit of a ' defensio.^ 1 take the connexion of ideas to be this : 
" You say fighting was the one thing the old legislation had in 
view : I am not surprised you should think so ; but we on our 
part (avTovs) must not at any point (ouSei/) be too "keen fighters ;" 
i.e. " do not let us insist on our view, but try by discussion to elicit 
the true view." (To those who still prefer avroi's I ^^ould suggest 
taking it as neuter, the following eKetviov being the first reference 
to the authors of the vo/xifxa.) 

a 2. u)S ixdXL(TTa . . . (TirovSa^ovTisiv, " in the name of our 

205 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

common devotion to the subject " — " not forgetting that they cared 
about it just as much as we do." ravTa is "laws and government." 

a 3. Kat fi. T. Aoyw crvvaKoXovOija-aTej " help me, please, to 
conduct the argument." 

a 4. Trpoa-TrjcTijJiJLiOa yovv, " I'm sure you won't mind if I 
appeal to Tyrtaeus." TrpotcrTaa-dai means " to put in a position of 
authority over us. Schol. " tovtov ovv €v tw Aoyw wapekafSev 6 
' K6rjvaio<i ^ei'os, (09 /cat avrov TroXefxov crvfjifSovXov yeyovdra." 

a 6. ravra here (like the tovtiov seven lines higher up) refers 
to war, not to law. — /xaAtcrra avOpioiruiv : " dvOpiOTToyv enim superla- 
tivis ita, apponitur ut eorum significationem augeat" Ast, who 
quotes Theaet. 148 b apio-rd y dvdpioTriov, Hipp. Mai. 285caKpt- 
/^eo-rara dvOpMiroiv, and many other examples from Plato and other 
authors. Cp. below 637 a 1 KaAAtcrT' dvOpioiriDv. 

b 1. ovt' . . . ovV MSS., ov8' . . . ov8' Boeckh (following 
Tyrtaeus). 

b 2. eiTTOiv (TX^^ov oLTravTa, " and he goes pretty well through 
the list of (worldly) advantages." Cp. the fragment of Tyrtaeus, 
Bergk, A.L. 12. 

b 4. oSe fi€v yap ktA., " as to Megillus, he has them at his 
fingers' ends." 

b 9. 8oK€LS y. 8. (ro(f>os rj. ei. k. dyaSos, on . . . cyKeKW/xtaKas : 
at first sight it looks as if Siacfiepovrois (i.e. T.'s poetical skill) 
contained the whole ground for the bestowal of the epithets croc^ds 
and aya^d?, but a consideration of the whole argument, and more 
particularly of the comparison in 630 c and e between the heaven- 
inspired legislator who aims at producing virtue (and whose code 
is pervaded by one principle), and the hand-to-mouth human 
legislator who meets special needs by special (repressive) enact- 
ments, — this consideration shows, I think, that the words here 
mean : " your insight and your right feeling are manifest from the 
high praises you bestow on high virtue in war " ; i.e. it was not 
merely the excellence of T.'s poetry that makes the speaker call him 
(ro(f>6<s and aya^ds, but the fact that he praises virtue, even though, 
as he shows in 630 b, he takes a narrow view of virtue. 

d 2. X"^^'''^'''^'''®?) " deadliest " ; irpa.6r€pov, " milder." 

d 7 ff. Badham brackets iTratvwv as being an impediment 
to the construction, while many emendations have been proposed 
of TT/obs Tov<i Iktos (of which the best seems to me the Trpbs rov 
€kt6s of Baiter and Badham). I would in the text adopt a less 
extensive emendation than any of them, suggested to me by 
F.H.D., — that of transposing rroTepov and iroTepovs. The latter 

206 



NOTES TO BOOK I 629 d 

word may well have been put first by a scribe who thought 
vTTipeTrrjvicra's ought to have more of an object than it has, or the 
transposition may have been made inadvertently. The construc- 
tion of (iratvijjv is thus made easier,, and Tr/aos tov<s €kt6^ needs no 
emendation. .We must supply tovs fxkv from the tous St. Plato 
often lightens a sentence by such omission. Cp. Laws 648 c 1, 
Phil. 35 e, 36 e, and Prot. 330 a. 7roAe/xoj/ in this case would be 
used loosely for the fighters in the war, as we speak of "the 
meeting " or " the cause " or " the trade," meaning the people 
engaged in one or the other. 

e 2. ToXfjL^]G-(ji(TL : ToXix-qcrovcn, which Stephanus and Stallbaum 
read, has no MS. authority. The same subjunctive without av 
following a relative occurs at v. 34 of the same poem of Tyrtaeus : 
ovTLV dpLarevovra fxkvovra re fxapvafxevov t€ | yrj<s irepi kol 7rai8(ov 
dovpos "A/orys oXeay. The exact words of T. at this passage are : 
ov yap dvrjp dyaOos yiyveTat ev TroXipni) cl ixrj TerXai-q p,€v opoiv 
(f)6vov alfxaToevTa Kal Srjtioi^ opkyoir^ cyyv^^ei' l(Tra^€vos. Plato 
has reproduced the /xev . . . Kat while varying the other points. 

630 a. The Athenian now proceeds to show that while the 
milder warfare brings out one sort of virtue, the deadlier warfare, 
wherein a man's foes are those of his own community, brings out 
more kinds. It is not only that the danger is nearer and greater. 
The difficulty at such times is to know whom to trust. The out- 
ward bonds of society, which keep men straight, are broken, and 
it is then seen who are good really, and who were only kept 
apparently good by the restraints of social observance. Both 
. Plato and Theognis may be held to have assumed that in a o-raorts 
the right was all on one side. 

a 5. TTto-To? is best taken absolutely (not with Iv x^^- ^'XO • 
" at a time of deadly civil strife a loyal man is worth his weight 
in gold." This way of taking ttio-tos is quite consistent with the 
following TTtcTTos /cat vytr]<s iv crTda-ea-Lv, and ttvottott^s iv rots 
Setvois, inasmuch as it is in these trials that his loyalty is shown. 

This passage prepares the way for treating (r(i)<f>po(rvvY] (as he 
does later on) as a fight. The three kinds of fighting are : (1) 
against foreigners ; in this the virtue is dvSpcta ; (2) against 
fellow-citizens : in this the virtue of SiKaLocrvvrj is required most 
of all ; (3) against oneself : in this fight the virtue displayed is 
(ruxfipocrvvrj. 

b 1. eXdovcrat Eus,, Proclus, iXdovcra MSS. 
b 2. The words avTrj<i fxovrjs avSpeias, which are added in 
JEusebius's and Proclus's quotation of this passage, and are trans- 

207 



630 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

lated by Ficiiius, are missing in all MSS. They are almost 
necessary for the sense, and the repetition of the word dvSpetas 
might well divert the transcriber's eye, and cause him to omit the 
words. — vyL-q's is used as in the passage of Simonides quoted at 
Prot. 346 c vycrj's dvqp : '^ sound" in a moral sense, ^^ honest." (See 
above on a and below on 639 a 7.) So in Ep. x. 358 c to yap 
(^kfiaiov KOi TTLcrrbv Kal vyus, tovto lytu <^7//xt elvau Trjv dXrjdLvrjv 
(fyiXocrocfiiav. 

b 3. StafSavTes : used in the sense of taking a firm stand (lit. 
straddle) as in the passage of Tyrtaeus from which the above 
^ quotation comes (11. 21). 

b 4. Again Eusebius must be held to have preserved the correct 
reading iv w iroXkjxio (so Winckelmann conjectured), where the 
MSS. have tv tw TroAe/xo). Clemens, who reads kv tw TroXkpua^ in 
quoting the passage, saves the sense by omitting (fipdleL Tvprato^. 

b 7. €v fxdXa oXiyoiv Eus., fidXa oAtywv MSS. A matter of 
rhythm. As Eus. seems often to have been right in tjiis passage 
when differing from the MSS., I follow Burnet in choosing the 
former, especially as the addition of e^ seems to improve the 
balance of the phrase. — The mention of mercenaries suggests a 
further difference between Tyrtaeus's ideal and that of Theognis. 
The mere fighter does not care which side he is on. Theognis's 
loyal man fights for what he thinks right. 

b 8. Now that the Xoyos we have followed has shown us a 
higher and a lower excellence — one four times as good as the other, 
we may say — can we imagine that any "decent" legislator, let 
alone a divinely-inspired one, would have only the lower in view ^ 
in framing his laws? (Cp. above 628 e.) — We shall find Plato's 
common personification of the Xoyos lower down at 644 e in 
the phrase cfirjcnv 6 Xoyos. 

C 2. TySe : i.e. in Crete. 

C 3. For dXXo MSS. Heindorf conjectured dXXoae, comparing 
Theaet. 202 e r) oi'et dXXoak ttol f^Xkirovra TavTa etTretv. In spite 
of Kiddell's defence of aAAo {Digest of PI. Idioms § 21) I adopt 
H.'s correction because I believe that in the idiom in which 
some part of ttoiciv has to be understood with aAAo, there is 
always a rt with the aAAo, and the negative to it is not ovk dXXo 
(TTOtctv) y], but ovSkv dXXo {ttolclv) t]. So in a question at Xen. 
Mem. ii. 3. 17 rt yap aAAo, €<f)r] 6 H^toKpaTrjs, rj kli'8vv€V€l<s 
cTTiSei^at; (cp. also Euthyd. 287 e). Perhaps the e of dXXoa-e was 
elided, and that may have facilitated the change to aAAo. 

C 6. StKaLoa-vvTjv reAeav : for the whole of this passage it 

208 



NOTES TO BOOK I 63OC 

is important to compare Aristotle, Eth. Nic. v. p. 1129 b 11 ff. 
especiaUy (at 1. 26) avT-q jxkv o^v rj SiKacocrvvrj dpeTrj fi^v ecTTLj 
d\X ovx aTrAw?, dAAa tt/dos cTepov, and 1. 29 where he quotes 
Theognis 147 : €v Se SLKacoa-vvrj a-vXXrjfSSrjv irdcr dpeTrj [eVt] 
(Bergk 'cttlv). Aristotle's definition of SLKaioa-vvrj as the dpir-q 
that shows itself in one's dealings with one's neighbour (Tr/aos 
€Tepov) explains and coincides with Plato's identification of 
StKaioarvvrf with Trio-Torr^s. 

C 7. Kara Kaipov: as Kara rpoirov (below 635 d) means "in 
the right way," so Kara Kaipov means " opportunely." Cp. Pind. 
Isth. ii. 32 X^^P^ ' ' ' '^^^ NtKO/xa^^o? Kara Kaipov veifJL aTraaats 
dviai<s. 

c 8. 8vvd/M€i Tov Ti/Jiia elvai : a still more complicated verbal 
phrase depending on Svvafjus is to be found at Phaedo 99 c ttjv 8e 
TOV (OS olov T€ f^kXricTTa avTa TeOrjvai 8vvafjiiv ovtoj KelaOai. 
Cp. Rep. 433 d rj tov eKoxTTOV kv avTrj ra avTov irpaTTeiv SvvafJLis. 
Varieties of verbal construction with Svvajxis are (1) simpl. inf. 
Phil. 58 d 8wa/xis epdv re tov aAv^^ovs Kal irdvTa '4v€Ka tovtov 
TrpaTTeiv, Rep. 364 b Svvafxi^ . . . dKeiaSai : (2) inf. with tov : Phil. 
57 e and Rep. 533 a and 532 d, rj tov SiaXeyecrOai Svva/xis, Rep. 
328 c iv 8vvdfM€L tov paStw? TropevecrOai irpos to ao^Tv, Rep. 507 c 
TTjv tov opdv T€ Kal 6pd(rOai Svva/jLiv : (3) loa-Te with inf. : Rep. 
433 b Tr]v Svvafxiv Tra/oeo-^ev ojo-tc eyyevecrdai : (4) irpos to c. inf. : 
Polit. 272 b Trapovcrr]<s avTois ovtoj 7roWrj<5 o"XoA'>}s Kal Svi/a^ews 
TT/aos TO firj povov dvOpMTrots aAAa koI drjptois 8ia Aoywv 
(Tvyyiyvea-Oai, Laws 657 b 8vvap,iv €';(et tt/oos to 8ia(fi6eipai Trjv 
Ka0i€p(j)6ei(rav \opeiav. 

d 3. Tov<s TToppui vop-oOeTa^ MSS. Fault has been found with 
this expression (1) because of the occurrence of two cases of the 
word vop.oO€Tr)s in one sentence, and (2) because Tzoppia was 
thought an inadequate expression: "Nam aperte fateor etiam 
istud TTopfXD sic indefinite positum mihi displicere " (Stallbaum, 
who, like Ficinus, prints the sentence as a question). Eitter 
would read vo/xo^eo-tas for vofxoOeTa^s. At Rep. 620 c the soul of 
Thersites is discovered iroppdi kv vo-TaTOi9. Perhaps here and the^e 
TToppui has the sense of our " low down," " out of the way," " beyond 
the pale." (Ought vopo6eTa<s perhaps to be rejected ?) — For the use 
of dirofSdWopev cp. below 637 e, where dirof^dXXta has even a 
stronger condemnatory force. 

d 4. ov\ r)p.€i<s ye ktA., " no, we don't : it is ourselves we are 
depreciating : we are quite at sea in imagining ..." 

d 8. TO Se, "but," cp. Heindorf on Theaet. 157 b. (C. W. E. Miller 
VOL. I 209 P 



630 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Am. Phil. Ass. Trans, vols, xxxix. and xl. denies Heindorf's statement 
— in vain, I think.) For to Se in a question cp. 886 b 3, 967 a 6 
TO Se Stj TTws e;(ov av clt] ; and see E. S. Thompson's note on 
Meno 97 c. 

d 9. The substitution of to dXrjOes for aXr]6k<i is like our 
putting " it is truth " in a similar sentence for " it is true." Cp. 
659 b 3 (OS ye to SiKaiov. 

e 1. Badham's guess that Oeiov dvSpos, written with con- 
tractions as Oetafi, was first copied Oecap and then changed to 
Oeias gives us what, in view of the following ^tlOcl, is, both for 
grammar and sense, indispensable, i.e. a person. deias cannot 
stand. There is no substantive, with which it would make sense, 
that could have been left out. Even if, with the scholiast, we 
supply TToAtTctas (which Stephanus jorints), or (better) with 
Gottleber, vo/^o^eo-ia?, and grant that it might have been omitted, 
kriBeL still has to go back to Cleinias's last sj)eech but one for a 
subject. (Cp. also the It Wet and the auTov in 631 a.) Cousin 
was looking in the right direction when he suggested su2:)plying 
K€(fia\7Js with~ Oetas. Cp. Meno 99 d kol ol AaKWi^es, oVai' Ttva 
eyKU)jXid^u)(Tiv dyaOov dv8pa, Oetos d.vr)p, c^acriv, ovtos, and Arist. 
N. E. 1145 a 28 CTrei 8e (rirdvLOV kol to Oeiov dvSpa elvai, KaOaTrep 
OL AaKwi/es etw^acrt Trpoo'ayopeveiv^ OTav ayacr^wo-t crcfioSpa tov 
(creios avqp cf>acriv), ovto) Kal 6 OrjpuoSrjS ev tols dvOpitiiroLS 
anrdvLos, below 642 d 5 'ETrc/xei/tSi^s . . . dvrjp ^etos, and 666 d 
Tts av ovv TrpeTTOL detois dvSpdcTLV ; 

e 3. Kttt KttT etSrj ^rjT€LV avTiov tovs vofxovs ov8 drrcp ol twv 
vvv etSrj 7rpoTi9kp.€voL ^rjTovcnv : this difficult passage has been 
variously interpreted as it stands, and variously emended. The 
first question to decide is whether the etSr] are classes of virtue^ or 
classes of laws. Stallbaum held the former view (as did Ast), and 
he took aijTwv as referring to the dpeTwv implied in Trdcrav 
dpeTTjv. Though this seems impossible, Steinhart's emendation of 
avTwv to avT'^s provides a good construction for this interpretation. 
And this interpretation would be satisfactory, if the sentence 
stopped at vo/xovs. But what have the modern, narrow-minded, 
hand-to-mouth legislators, who are referred to in the latter half of 
the sentence, to do with et^y] dpeTrj^ ? The point made against 
them is that they do not look to dpeT-q at all. In the latter half 
of the passage the etS-q must be kinds or classes of laws. Inasmuch 
as avTcov seems to be contrasted with t(ov vvv, I do noUadopt Ast's 
alteration of avTMv to avTov. I would, with Schneider, take ov8' 
as ov 8e (I would even suggest that we ought perhaps to read ovx 

210 



NOTES TO BOOK I 6306 

for oi'S'), and would translate : " and (we ought to have said) that 
he tried to devise" (the XPV^ ^^^ *^® ^^ eriOeL empower us to 
translate ^rjreLv as referring to past time) " the laws of the men of 
that time in classes, but not the classes which the legislators of the 
present day have in mind when they devise laws." Seeing that 
a divinely-inspired legislator must always have in mind the 
production of virtue of all kinds in the members of his state, the 
classes or heads under which he would arrange his laws would 
correspond with classes and kinds of virtue and excellence — those 
e.g. which are enumerated at 631 b and c : — this is implied, but 
not directly expressed. — The meaning of {r^Teii/, which I have 
translated try to devise, is, as Ast says, illustrated by the to irepl 
v6jxov<s (-qTrjfia occurring a few lines further down. It denotes 
the practical side of the inquiry into law — the trying to get, the 
casting about for laws, excogitating laws. Cp. Soph. O.T. 658 e/zot 
^rjTOJv oXiOpov T^ (f)vyr]v €k ttJctSc yyjs, and especially Politicus 
299 b 5 and e7 Kv^epvrjTLKyjv . . . ^tjtmv Trapa to, ypd/xfjLara. 
(Ft. Doering, De legum Platonicarum compositione, Inaug. Diss. 
Leipzig 1907, takes avriov to refer to Minos and Lycurgus, and 
translates (y]T€Lv tovs vofiovs " in leges inquirere" and makes it 
depend on XP^^ ' "i"**^^^ socios {in leges eorum inquirere)." This 
takes no account of krldei f^XeTroyv, and though the following 
^i]Tov(rLv might be taken in the same sense, C^rei in the next line 
could not. Also he wants not xPV^j ^^^ XP''! ^^^ ^^^ interpre- 
tation.) 

e 4. ov yap ktX. : I think €l8ov<s has to be supplied with ov : 
" whatever kind of law any law-maker finds to be needed, nowa- 
days he devises, and adds it (vra/oa^e/xevos) to its class : one adds a 
law about division of property, or the treatment of sole-heiresses, 
another one about personal violence " ; i.e. the modern legislator 
finds his code arranged under several headings (such as inheritance, 
or assault), and all he can do is to add something to one of the 
existing chapters, if he comes across a case that the existing law 
fails to meet. The philosopher, on the other hand, like the 
original divine lawgiver, imagines himself to be unfettered by 
existing codes. He begins all over again on philasophic principles 
— the principles which he says he can discern in the divine 
lawgiver's enactments. (Cf. Rep. 427 a where Socrates has just 
compared the details of the work of modern lawgivers — 
vopLodeTovvTes re Kal iTravopOovvTes — to the cutting off of the 
ever reappearing Hydra's heads.) Cleinias, the Athenian says, 
is on the right track. He sees that you must ask what is the 

211 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

educational value of law. In thus saying, it must be admitted 
that he rather reads his own views into the Cretan's statement 
that what Minos wanted was to make good soldiers, and Cleinias 
must have been rather surprised (after the manner of M. Jourdain), 
to find he had been a philosopher after all. The Athenian next 
asks if he shall show him how he ought to have gone on after 
such a promising beginning, and thus skilfully gets into the 
professor's chair without seeming to claim it for himself. This 
manoeuvre is dramatically perfect. 

631 a 1. Twi/ €v ^. : what is implied here is : " and this is the 
way Minos and Lycurgus must have sought for laws." 

a 2. croij : Ast is, I think, wrong in writing crov, and taking 
it as merely possessive with eTrt^etprycriv : it is best taken as 
governed by aya/xat. The two constructions that follow are 
marked off by /xev and 8e, as if ovk aya/xat were to follow in 
the 8e clause : a parallel to the former may be found at Eur. Iph. 
in Aul. 28 ovk aya/xat ravr dvSpbs aptcrrews, and possibly at 
Prot. 335 d eytoye crov riyv cjaXoa-o^iav aya/xat. That (ovk) 
aya/xat mighf have stood before a ort clause may be seen by Hipp. 
Mai. 291 e aya/xat a-ov ort /xot SoKets . . . Instead, however, 
of going on ovk aya/xat he varies the phrase, and goes on as if 
the jx€v had stood at the beginning of the to yap air dpeTrjs 
dpx€o-6aL clause. The perfectly regular construction of the 
complex sentence would have been : Kat crov rrjv /xev iir. aya/xat 
. . opOov ydp ' ort Se . . . ovk aya/>tat, ov yap opBov. 

a 8. SteAd/xevov means "expound," which goes closely with Aeyetv. 

b 4. fidrrjv, sine caussa : cp. Ale. I. 113 c 4 e/xe Se atria /xaxT^v, 
Laws 715 b /<at rd tovtidv 8iKata, a ^ao"tv eivai, /xcxtt/v elprjcrOai. 

b 8. 7rdAt§ KTarat MSS. and Eusebius, Krarat Theodoret, 
7ra/)tVTaa'^atStobaeus; 7ra/)ta"TaTat Badham conjectured, 7r/)oo-/cTaTat 
Hug. TToAts is out of place here : (1) the point of view is that of the 
individual members of the community : rov<^ avrots x/ow/xevovs 
b 5 ; (2) it is moreover unnatural to speak of a state as possessing 
e.g. lorxy'S €i§ 8p6p.ov ; (3) if TrdAts stood it seems more natural 
that it should not have a rts agreeing with it (Eusebius, in his 
quotation of the passage, leaves it out), rts, no doubt, was the 
only subject of ^ky^rjrai, and Stobaeus's Traplarraa-daL — he fancied 
the sentence as reported, or dependent — points the way to 
Badham's Trapio-rarat, which is palaeographically not unlikely 
to have been corrupted to TrdAts Krarat. (IC was read twice, the 
second time as K.) I would follow Schanz in adopting it. It 
may be noted that S€)(^y]raL is aptly used of gifts which come from 

212 



NOTES TO BOOK I 631b 

the gods. — For the sense cp. St. Matthew 6. 33 {V^TeiTe 8e irpioTov 
TYjv fSaa-iXeiav Kal Trjv SiKaLOcrvvqv avroi', Kai ravra Tvavra 
7rpo(TT€6t)(T€TaL vfXLV. — FoF TrapLOTTacrdaL thus used cp. Laws 707 a 
KUKOV kv OaXd(T(rYj Tpt-qpets OTrAtrats Trapea-TMO-ai p.axofX€VOLS. 
— At 697 b dyaOd are divided into three classes : (1) rot Trept tyjv 
i/'^xV dyaOd, (2) to. irepl to crw/za KaXd kol dyadd, and 
(3) TO, Trepl rr]v ova-lav kol xp-qfxaTa. Of these divisions the 
second and third together correspond to rot dvdpioTrtva here. 

C 2. rd ixev iXdrrova : the same four " worldly goods " are 
enumerated in Bk. II. 661a: at Gorg. 451 e Icrxvs is left out, 
while in the well-known ctkoXlov^ to which Socrates there refers, 
after health, beauty, and honestly-won wealth, comes (as fitting on 
a social occasion) rj/Sdv fxerd tu)v c^tAwv as a fourth. The addition, 
in the passage in Bk. II., of fjLvpia 8e aAAa dyaOd keyerai shows 
tliat we are not to lay stress on any particular three or four. 

C 4. Ktv^crets Tw o-cu/xart : a geiiitival dative of the instrument, 
going closely with the verbal noun ; so below 633 b rats X^P^'' 
lxd\aL<s. — ov TV(f>X6s : the proverbial blindness of wealth is here 
spoken of as a malady incident to its possessor. 

cQ.rj (f)p6vr](ris : for this repetition cp. below 823 c 4 and 
Heindorf on Gorg. 501 a. — For the sense cp. 688 b 2, 963 a 8. 

C 7. /xera vovv is the reading of the MSS. and of Stobaeus ; 
Eusebius and Theodoret read jxerd vov, which I follow Schanz 
and Burnet in adopting. Badham, independently, suggested the 
latter reading, referring to the passage (7 10 a) where Plato speaks 
slightingly of tyjv SrjfJooSrj o'oxfipocrvv'qv as contrasted with that 
which is accompanied by <^p6vy]<ji% or rather is cfipovrjcns as well. 
At 696 d also crojcfipoa-vvr] dvev Tracn^s rrjs dW-qs dperrj^ pLeixovcDficvrj 
is spoken of as a very poor thing. The stress laid, all through 
this passage, and elsewhere in the Laws, on the importance of the 
conjunction of the virtues is in favour of Eusebius's reading. (We 
might almost say Plato holds that one virtue by itself, or at all 
events the natural tendency to it, needs to be corrected by another 
— e.g. above at 630 b, and below at 831 e, he talks of the danger 
that the mere dvSpeios may become a nuisance. In different 
passages in the Laws we are told that two things are necessary to 
perfection of character : (1) the natural disposition to a particular 
virtue must be trained in action (791 c to viKav Setixara cTrtTrjSevfjLa 
dv8p€La<3, 815 e yeyv fxvacrfxkvos Trpos dvSpetav, 816 a dyvp^yaaTO^ 
yeyovio'i irphs to crox^/ooi/etv) ; (2) one virtue cannot stand alone ; 
it must be helped by others. Above (630 a ff.) the Athenian 
speaks of Trto-TOT?;? as involving orvfMTrdcra dpcry, and he says we 

213 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

miglit call this reXea SiKaiocrvvrj — " perfect righteousness." In the 
present passage he uses ScKaLocrvvi] in the narrower sense. All 
this shows that our present discussion is practical, not speculative. 
The author wants us to have in mind the perfect character, and 
the way to produce it, rather than a classification of the virtues, 
or a scientifically exact nomenclature for a treatise on Moral 
Philosophy.) 

631 d 1 — 632 b 1. ravra Se iravra ktA., " nature has set all 
these above the other four, and the lawgiver must put them in the 
same rank. In the next place he must proclaim to the citizens 
that his other commands to them have these blessings in view : 
that of the blessings themselves the human wait upon the divine, 
and all the divine upon their leader wisdom. (As to the commands 
I spoke of ) he must (Set) so dispense honour and disgrace as to watch 
over (the whole life of the citizen) : he must regulate the marriages 
they make, and his care must next extend to the production 
and rearing of both sexes, from youth to age. To do this he mubt 
carefully and closely observe them in all their intercourse with each 
other, and notice what gives pain, what gives pleasure, what excites 
desire and ardent affection. His laws must themselves be the in- 
struments for rightly administering both blame and praise. More- 
over, in anger, in fear, in all the troubles that misfortune brings, 
in the relief from trouble that comes with prosperity, in all the 
chances of disease or health, war or peace, poverty or wealth, 
what the lawgiver has to teach and to define is, in each of these 
various conditions, what is right, and what is wrong." 

I have translated this difficult and somewhat loosely jointed 
passage in full, to show what I take to be the connexion of 
thought between its different parts, (d 3) fSXeTrovaas etvat is 
equivalent to /SXeTretv (cp. 963 a 2 Trpos yap eV ecfia/xev Setv del 
Tvdvd^ rjfxtv TO. Twv vofJLiDV pXeTTOkx' €lvai), and Tr/ooo-ra^ets is its 
subject : the dat. iroXtTaiS is governed by Trpoarrd^eis : avrots (i.e. 
the citizens) is best taken with StaKeAcvo-reov : tovt(dv refers (not 
to Trpocrra^ei? but) to dyaOd (from rovrtov Se to /SAeTretv is a sort 
of parenthesis). If this explanation be adopted it will be seen that 
there is no force in Badham's contention that these words mean 
that the legislator is to charge someone else (e.g. the magistrate) to 
make the detailed enactments of which a summary is given from d 6 
onwards, and which the legislator himself is to make. To obviate this 
supposed contradiction he reads Trpd^eis for Trpocrrd^eLS. (He does 
not say how we are to construe elvai.) Fr. Doering (ut supra) 
makes this supposed contradiction the basis of his view that the 

214 



NOTES TO BOOK I 63 1 d 

whole passage from 631 d 6 irepi re ydjxovs to 632 d 1 (fnXoTifxia 
was written by Plato after he had changed his views about the task 
of the legislator. He began the Laws, D. says, with the view ex- 
pressed at Rep. 425 c(and 427 a) that the legislator had only to 
make general arrangements for the outline of the state, and 
especially for the educative influences under which the citizens are 
to grow up : detailed enactments were to be left to the magistrates, 
or even to the good sense of individuals. 

d 6 ff. irepi T€ ydfxovs and ev rais yevvi^crea-Lv go with tTri/xe- 
X-eicrOaL, which, I think, also governs the genitives v€wi/ oVtwv and 
lovTOiv. (For Trepi with ace. after eTrt/xeAeto-^at cp. Menex. 
248 e TTJs Se ttoAcws tcrre irov koI avTot tyjv CTri/xeAetav, ort 
vofxovs dijxkvri Trepl tovs tiov €v tw TroAe/xo) TeXevTyjaavTiov TraiSas 
T€ Kol yevvrjTopas cTrt/xeAetTat.) Ast says the genitive vecov oVtwi/ 
agrees with TraiSiov : but even though T/30<^ai, as he says, includes 
educatio et institutio as well as nutriendi ojfficium, it could hardly 
be used of the care to be bestowed upon the aged. Stallbaum 
strangely takes vewv ovroiv as the subjective genitive to T/3o<^ats — 
" the care of the children, whether exercised by young or old." 

e 3. I would not follow Stallbaum in introducing re after ev 
Trao-ats, because the participial clause goes very well in a kind of 
subordination to TLfMwvTa Kal drifid^ovTa cTrt/xeAeia^at, expressing 
the way in which the legislator can get the power of so doing. 

632 a 2. With \pky€Lv we must supply Set from above. 

a 2 ff. kv 6pyai<i T€ av . . . KaAov Kat /x?y : Ritter remarks that 
whereas the previous words refer to the ordinary course of life 
and social intercourse, the key-word to this passage is Tapa\ai 
It deals with all the extraordinary occurrences that " upset " the 
mind, as we say. He is perhaps right in saying that even in 
€.vTv)(^ia there is a disturbing influence, but few will follow him 
in his translation of (a 4) twv Totoi'rwv dirocfivyai. He says 
ToiovTO)v means the educative influences to which, in ordinary 
life, a man is subjected. No doubt Ast and Stallb. are right in 
saying that twv toiovtcuv refers to twv (8ia Svarvxtav) rapa^wv 

a 6. TraOrjixara may mean emotions (so Stallb. apparently), 
but it is better to take it in the general sense of occurrences ; cp. 
Symp. 189 d Set 8e 7rp(7)Tov v/xas /xaOeLV rrjv dvdpiOTrivrjV (ftvcriv 
Kttt Ttt iraOi^ixaTa avTrjs. 

b 1. TO T€ KaXov KOi /x7^, " h.e. quatenus affectioni ohsequi 
deceat necne" Ast. 

(Tliere are two other notes of Ritter's on the passage above 

215 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

translated which are helpful. He says, no doubt the place for 
the lawgiver's pronouncement (631 d 2) on the relative value of 
the spiritual and temporal excellences would be one of those 
TrpooLjxLa or prefaces to branches of enactments, of which the Laws 
contain many, and which Plato compares, at the end of the fourth 
book, to the prelude of a musician, or the conversation of a wise 
doctor with an educated patient on the subject of his disease and 
its treatment. The other note is the comparison of the outline 
of man's life (d 6 ff.), in which the salient points serve as hints 
for the classification of laws, to 958 c dvSpl Syj, to /xcra tovto, 
y€vvr]6kvTt koI iKrpac^kvn koI yevvqcravTc Kal iKTpkxpavri re/cva, 
K'ai a-vpLpLeL^avTi crvfifSoXaLa /xer/atws, SlSovtl tc Slkus et riva 
rjSiK-/jK€i Kal Trap' krkpov eKAaySovrt, (tvv tols vofxois €V jJ'oipa 
yqpdo-avri reXevrt] ycyvoLT dv Kara <^iVtv.) 

fjberd Se ravra . . . eAAeiVet : in this passage both sense 
and construction have been obscured by the idea that it deals 
only with the way in which money is made and spent. Ast, 
for instance, says KOLViovtas and StaAiVets are governed by 
(fivXarreiv, and, as he naturally wants something to connect 
(fyvXarreLV with cTrtcTKOTretv, he proposes to alter KaO' to Kal : 
also, both he and Stallbaum understood KOLvo)VLas to refer to 
business partnerships. This involves them in further difiiculties 
with TrdcTLv tovtols, and with cKova-tv re Kal aKovcriv. The 
former they take to be neuter, and add iv before irda-iv (though 
St. does not print it). St. says that kv Tracrtv tovtols " refertur ad 
rds KTr]cr€L<s Kal rd dvaXwfxara civium." Many of the difficulties 
disappear when it is recognized that the passage deals with two 
distinct subjects, and falls into two divisions at the word t/oottov. 
The first subject is the regulation of money-making and money - 
spending ; the second the supervision of felloivships and associations, 
a very different matter. The K-at after t/oottov connects cfyvXarreiv 
with eTTio-KOTretv, the genitival dative Tracrtv tovtols is masc. 
(sc. TToAcVats), and kKovcrtv and dKov(Tiv agree with it : with 
oTTOiov I think we must supply Tpoirov from the preceding 
sentence. The word has occurred so recently, and would fall in 
so naturally with Kad' oirolov that the omission is not extra- 
ordinary. It is not necessary to press the words kKovcnv and 
dKovcTLv to the logical conclusion that they apply equally to both 
the KOLvoyvtat and the StaAiVets. Though it is conceivable that 
certain associations might claim adherents who did not wish to 
belong to them, it is naturally the breaking up of an association 
which may be against the will of some of its members. (So 

216 



NOTES TO BOOK I 632 b 

at Soph. Ant. 1159 Tv\-q yap 6p9oi Kal rvxV KaTappeiret tov 
€VTvy(ovvTa tov re 8v(nv)(ovvT aet we have to translate the re 
by or, and not to assume the author to mean that Fortune, when 
raising a man, makes him both fortunate and unfortunate.) 

b 6. Just as KTrja-eL<s and avaXiJipara are the direct objects 
of ^vAaTTctv, so, in the parallel clause, iTna-KOTrelv governs 
Kotvwvtas and StaAvcrets ; in both cases, however, the direct 
objects have explanatory adjuncts — in the first ovtlv av yiyvrfrai 
TpoTToVy and in the second kuO' ottolov av '4k. irp. r. t. tt^os 
aAAr/Aoi'?. — iKau-Tov is emphatic like the Ik. in ttj's eKao-rwv 
SLaOea-euys above. — I cannot help suspecting that Kal prj after 
StKatov is the addition of a scribe who thought the expression 
ought to square with to re KaXhv Kal prj in b 1 : also that the 
same scribe added the re after eo-nv, which then became necessary. 
If I am right in wishing to reject these three words, 019 is a true 
relative, to which rwv tolovtcov is the antecedent ; if not, oh 
must be used as a dependent interrogative. I would translate the 
whole : " and to keep an eye on the associations formed or broken 
by any of the citizens — may be willingly, may be on compulsion — 
(so as to- observe) the manner in which all such mutual transactions 
take place, both the just ones and the unjust " (or, retaining 
the Kal p-q and the re, and supposing the subject of the two 
verbs to be to Si/catov, " and to distinguish the just ones from the 
unjust"). It is impossible not to wish that Plato had lived to 
rewrite this whole passage. 

For the Kotvwviat of b 4 cp. Kejp. 365 d kirl yap to XavOdvecv 
a-vvwpo(TLas t€ Kal €Tat/oia§ a-vvd^opev, Laws 856 b o? av . . . 
eraipias ttjv ttoXlv virqKoov Trotfj, Theaet. 173 d cnrovSal Se 
kraLpiCiv kir dp\d<s, and Ap. 36 b dpxojv Kal a-vviopocnCiv Kal 
o-Tao-ewv. It will be noticed that at 636 b it is stated that the 
o-TxrcrtTia, which were Koivioviai of the young men, led to o-Tctcrets/ 
This gives one reason for the state supervision of Kotvwvt at. 

b8. Twv vo/Awv : Schanz, following a suggestion of Ast's, 
brackets these words. Stephanus changed them to tw vo/xw (or 
T019 vo/iots). It seems far more likely that Plato should have 
allowed himself a genitive among so many datives, after the 
analogy of the genitive with dKpodo-dai (in the sense of obey, 
Gorg. 488 c), than that a scribe should have introduced it, or 
altered it from a dative. At p. 715 c evTreiOea-Taros has a dat. 
with it. An instance of the variety of construction which Plato 
allows himself may be seen at Hipp. Mai. 285 d, where, within 
a few lines, we read a (i^Sews crov) dKpoiovrai, and Tracrr/s Trj<; 

217 



632 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

a/);)(atoAoytas -{jSicrTa oLKpocovrat. For other out-of-the-way uses 
of the genitive in Plato cp. RejJ. 380 c crv/jixj/rjcfios (rot ei/xi, e<^7/, 
TovTov Tov Aoyov, Tim. 20 a ovSevos 18l(jjt7]v oVra, Euthyd. 306 c 
(TvyyiyvaxTKetv fi€v ovv avrots XPl '''V^ cTriOvfXLas (but Symp. 
218 b (rvyyvwcrecrOe yap rots re rore TTpa^Bela-i koI tols vvv 
key op,€ vols). 

C 1. Trpos TcAo? aTrdcrrjS vroAiretas €7r€^eX6(i)v, " when he has 
come to the end of all his organizations ; " aTrdcrrjs TroAtretas here 
corresponds to the Trdvra TroXirevfiaTa of 945 d 5. 

C 4. This is the j&rst mention of the vo/zo(^vAaK€s of whom we 
are to hear so much later. — KariStov Se : i.e. when the lawgiver has 
passed all the various classes of citizens in review. At 738 de 
Plato speaks of the great imj)ortance of the electors' personal 
knowledge of those on whom honour or office is to be conferred : 
fxet^ov ovSev TroAei aya^ov, rj yvoipifxovs avTovs avTOL<s etvai ' ottov 
yap fir] <^ws dXXrj\oL<5 ecTTtv dXXrjXoyv h> rots rpoTrots aAAcl ctkoto?, 
ovT dv Tiixrjs tt]? a^tas, ovt ap^wi/ ovt€ 8lk7js irore tis dv Trj'i 
7rpocrr)Kovcry]s opOws TvyxdvoL. — d-rraa-iv rovrois : this is neuter, 
and, like the following Tzdvra ravra^ means the whole of the 
lawgiver's enactments and arrangements, which are in charge of 
the (f)vXaK€<i. 

C 5. Sid cfypovqo-eois . . . lovras : " cum verbb. eundi (8ta c. 
gen.) est versari in aliqua re, persequi, studere,^' Ast, Lex. Cp. 
Prot. 323 a i)v {iroXiTiK-qv dperrjv) Set Sid SiKaio<rvvi]s Trdcrav Ikvai 
KOi (r(D(f>pocrvvy]<^ . and St. Paul's Sid TricrTews ydp TrepiTrarov/jicv 
2 Cor. 5. 7. For further particulars about the two classes of 
Guardians (those of original, and those of imparted wisdom) of the 
Laws cj). 961 ff. and 964 e ff. For So^a dX. cp. e.g. Tim. 51 d ft". 

C 6. oVws Trdvra ravra . . . ^cAort^tci, " that Wisdom may 
give unity to the whole system, and make it subservient to 
Temperance and Justice, instead of to Wealth and Pride." 
There is a striking similarity between the leading idea of this 
passage and that of St. Paul's words at Col. 2. 19 . . . Ty]v 
K€(f)aXy]V, €^ oi) irdv to crC^jxa Sid rdv d(/)cuv KaX (rvvSicrfXiov 
e7ri)(^opy]yovfX€vov Kal crvixfiif^a^opLivov av^et r'qv av^rjcnv rov 
Oeov. — For dirocfiaiveiv in the sense of make cp. Gorg. 516 c 
aAAo, prjv dypi(x)Tepovs ye avrovs d7re<fiy]V€v "^ o'iovs irapcXajSe, 
Ar. Eq. 817 crv S' 'AOrjvaiovs i^rjTiqa-as jXiKpoTToXira^ d7ro<firjvai : 
at p. 753 d below it is used of appointing magistrates, and at 
780a 1 of making laws; cp. the use of diroSeLKwa-dai at 783d 9 
in the sense of produce. — As to the form, which Ast, in deference 
to Dawes {Misc. Crit. 228) changed to dTrocfiaivy, possibly Dawes 

218 



NOTES TO BOOK I 632 c 

would have said that it was only 1st aorists of which the 1st sing. 
SLibj. was identical with the fut. which cannot stand after ottws ; 
at all events that is all that Dawes's instances could prove. 

So ends what Stallbaum rightly calls (631 b 3-632 d 1) 
"designatio quaedam et adumbratio universi operis." It stands 
to the whole treatise in the same relation that the Tr/Dooi/xia, 
noticed above on 631 d 2, stand to its various divisions. Its 
leading idea is that of the formative or educational power and 
function of good laws. As the Hebrew lawgiver says at Dent. 
32. 47 : "This law is no vain thing for you, it is your life, and 
through this ye shall prolong your days upon the land whither ye 
go over Jordan to possess it." 

d 2. v/xas is the subject of the Ste^eA^etv which goes with 
jSovkofxai^ as well as of that which has to be supplied with 
■>)6ekov (iv : Sie^cXOetv means set forth, demonstrate, explain 
thoroughly. The first thing he wishes his companions to demonstrate, 
if they are to make good the assertion that their laws are divine 
(624 a 3), and therefore perfect, is that the laws possess the 
advantages just enumerated ; i.e. that they foster all the virtues. 
They find, on proceeding, that the Dorian system does foster courage, 
but when they come to temperance, all is not as it should be. The 
reader is left to draw the conclusion for himself that the system is 
710^ perfect after all ; and the course of investigation proposed in 
the next paragraph comes to an end as a natural consequence. 

d 4. Kttt ottt; ktA. : then follows an intimation that the 
subject must be studied philosophically : " I want you to show," 
the Ath. says, " that there is a philosophy of law, a system (ra^is), in 
the divinely ordered code, to be discerned by the philosopher, 
and even by those who have lived under a perfect code : — how it 
enables a man to judge of the relative importance and proper 
function " (both involved in rd^Lv) " of various enactments." 

d 5. Texvrj €iT€ Kttt TLo-iv '(e.6e(TLv : the two classes of intellect 
here referred to correspond to the two classes of <f>vXaK€<i spoken 
of at c 5 — Toi's fM€v 6ia (fypovi^ceios, rovs Be 8t dX'q$ov<s So^rj-^ tovras. 

d 6. There is a polite irony in 17/xtv, 

d9. No subject of Ste^eXdeiv is expressed ; probably, if it had 
been, it would have been v/xas. The KaOdirep rjp^dfxeOa, which 
reminds his hearers that their first attempt has been a joint one, 
naturally leads to the suggestion in Ste^t/xev edv f^ovkrjcrde that 
all three should share in the proposed investigation. 

1. Ttt ttJs dvSpetas cTTcn^Sei^yaaTa, " the means of cultivating 
courage" (cp. 791b 5 ft'.). Cp. Rep. 501 d tl 5e ; tyjv roiavT-qv 

219 



632 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

{(fiV(riv) Tvxova-av twv Trpocry^KOVTMV eTrtTr/Sei'/xarwv ovk dyaOrjv 
TcAew? ea-ecrOat ; — The course recommended is this : first they are 
to consider the cultivation of all the separate virtues in turn, 
using the same method of investigation in each case ; then they 
are to show, if they can, that particular laws or codes of law con- 
duce to this object (cKetcre (^Xkiretv). 

e 3. Of oTTws av with subj. in a temporal sense (" as soon as ") 
we have possibly another instance at 755 a (if the text there 
is sound) ottws av tls ttAcov vrrepfSas e^So/x^Kovra ^fj. Kiihner- 
Gerth ii. p. 445 says that wie is similarly used in old German 
and in modern Volkssprache instead of als (temporal). 

e 5. vcrrepov 8e dpcTTJs Tracn^s : i.e. " after we have considered 
the methods whereby all virtue may be fostered." For vcrrcpov 
followed by a gen. cp. Soph. 257 c Trepl drr dv KerjTaL rd iirtcfiOey- 
yofxeva vcrrepov rrjs aTTO^acretos ovo/xara. 

e 6. Ritter supports Stallbaum's view that a ye vvvSi] 8L7JX6ofx€v 
(for a the early, MSS. have ra, Ven. ^ first corrected it, early 
edd. Kttt a) refers exclusively to the outline of the division of law 
which was given in 631 dff., and spoken of there as rds aAAa? 
TT/Doorra^et? tols TroXtrats, — as to marriage, money-making, etc. 
The reference is, doubtless, to laws of some kind ; but the phrase 
" the laws we examined just now " might well include a reference 
to the positive Cretan institutions with which the discussion began, 
as well as the imaginary ones summarized in 631 dff. I say 
imaginary, because the Ath. is there saying what the panegyric of 
Cretan laws ought to be. The subsequent course of the argument 
(634 a ff.) seems to favour the assumption that the Dorian institu- 
tions were referred to here. It should be remembered that the 
^^ imaginary " ones were Dorian too. Doering (p. 27), of course, 
excludes all possibility of there being a reference in a ye vvvSr) 
8irjX9op,ev to 631 d 6 ft*. He (following Tiemann, Kr. Analyse v. 
Bitch. I. und II. der pi. Gesetze) holds that eKelcre fSXeTrovra goes 
with Sn^XOofxev — "which we showed (at 631 b-d) to be eKeicre 
/3Xe7rovTa" that a Si-qXOofxev refers to human benefits (631 b 7), 
and that aTro^arou/xev means " we will show them (i.e. the human 
benefits) to be supplied by the Dorian laws." This is special 
pleading, with a vengeance. eKelcre f^Xeirovra must go with 
drrocfiavovfjiev ; 8ty]X6o/xev does not want a secondary predicate, and 
aTTocfiavovixev does. — This, discussion of Dorian institutions (which 
is not carried through very far) is a dramatic introduction to 
the subject of the Laws. Bruns and others err greatly, I think, in 
taking it to have been the original subject of the whole treatise. 

220 



I 



NOTES TO BOOK I 632 e 

e 7. dv 6€o<s iOeXy : this pious aspiration was, as the speaker 
no doubt knew, not destined to be fulfilled (cp. on 778 b 7). 

633 a 3. /cat ere re /cat ifiavTov : Stallb. takes this to mean " it 
is not only Cretan institutions that are to be criticized ; Spartan 
and Athenian must come in for their share of criticism as well " ; 
and this explanation fits in well with, the following /cotvos yap 
6 Aoyos, i.e. " the discussion is on law in general, not on Cretan 
law only." Still, it is more likely that the Ath. means " the 
discussion will test the validity of your views and mine as well 
as of his " ; kolv. y. 6 Aoyo? will then mean " we are all three 
open to criticism." The (a 4) Aeyere ovv is pointedly addressed to 
both the two, and the subsequent discussion deals in particular 
with Spartan rather than with Cretan institutions. 

a 7. Kat TpiTOV r) T€TapTOv ; " And thirdly, or fourthly ? " i.e. 
" Wliat shall we mention next as e7rLrr]8evp.aTa avSpeias ? " — to-co? 
yap dv ktX. : remembering that he had said that the investiga- 
tion of €TrLTr)8€vp,aTa dvSpeias is to serve as a type for that con- 
cerning the other branches of virtue, he is anxious to proceed 
formally. — Definite enumeration {SLaptdp-qa-acrdaL) makes for clear- 
ness {SrjXovvTa — -masc. — in the next line) ; cp. below 894 a 8 ws 
€v eiSccrtv \af3eiv per dpiBpov, 

a 8. €tTe pepiov eLT€ arr^ avTo, KaXelv \peiJov kam : with these 
words Plato is perhaps waiving aside the ontological question. 
Stallb. thinks they refer to "litem et controversiam a Sophistis 
motam" and similar discussions in the Protagoras. Bitter is 
possibly right in thinking that he has in mind somebody's 
criticism of the term p'^prj dperyjs, but not the Sophists' contention 
(that virtues of different kinds can each exist separately from other 
virtues). — St. quotes several passages in which Plato uses etVe . . . 
erre (or an equivalent) in a similar way: Grito 50a, Symjws. 
212 c, Laws 872 el, Tim. 28 b; Ritter adds Laws 863 b ev kv 
avr-Q (sc. ry 4'^XXl) '^V'^ <fiva-€(ji)<s etre Tt TrdOos €LTe rt pepos (ov 
6 dvpos. 

b 7. Tats X^P^^ ^^ ^ genitival dative of the instrument ; 
cp. 631c Ktvrycrets tw o-tuyLiart. (Moeris's and Harpocration's 
" X€p(TLpa-)(^ia^ IIAaTwi/ No/xwv d " is now generally thought to be 
based on a mistaken reading of this passage, though Pierson — on 
Moeris 406 — proposed, perhaps rightly, to read x^pa-ipaXLai'^ for 
Tats X^P^'- P'd)(^aLS here.) 

b 8. I follow Hermann and Schanz in accepting Ast's ytyvo/xei/ats 
for the MS. yLyvopkvcov. — The tlo-lv after d/OTrayat? is slightly 
apologetic. 

221 



633 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

b 9. KpvTrreta rt? ovo/xd^eraL, " there is a service called 
KpvTTTeLa." Below, the passage 763 a 6 tt/jo? Se tovtols . . . 
LKavios (Ti[)^€LV (c 2), — ill which occur the words etVe ns KpvTTTov'^ 
€LT€ dypovofJLovs eW 6 Tt KaXiov \aip€.L^ — throws some light upon 
this institution. The service was so called because those on it had 
to keep out of sight. They hid during the day, and did their 
work — usually killing prominent Helots — during the night. 
Plutarch says {Lijc. 28) so cruel an institution could not have 
been devised by Lycurgus ; that it must have been of later origin. 
No doubt, he says, that is what gave Plato the idea that Spartan 
^ institutions were only good for bravery. — Oavfiaarios ttoXvttovos 

Trpo's rds Kaprep-qo-et's, " as full as could be of hardening toils." 

C 1. x^''/^^^^^> "i^ wintry weather," a variety of the common 
Xetftwvos. — As Ast says, both the privatives (dvvTr. and do-rpo).) 
go with x^'-l^- ^* 942 d it is recommended that soldiers should 
get accustomed to lie on hard beds and go bare-headed and bare- 
footed. Cp. X^n. De rep. Lac. 2. 3. 

C 4. The yvpLvoirai^iai — the games of the naked — was a festival 
at Sparta at which choruses of men and of boys performed dances. 
Athenaeus (xiv. pp. 630 f.) mentions a "lyric" dance, called the 
yvp^voTraiScKri, of a stately and elaborate character, resembling 
the tragic e/x/xeAeta. Ath. also says (xv. p. 678) that at the 
yvfxvoTraiStaL the leaders of the choruses wore garlands of palm- 
leaves, which were called QvpeaTiKot' vTrofivyjfia ttJ? iv Qvpka 
yevojjievq's vtKrjs. The festival occurred in the middle of the 
summer in the month Hecatombaeon ; hence rfj tov Trviyovs 
poifJLjj ^iajia\op.kvi3iv. Probably the performance was a long and 
exacting one. 

c 6. €Kd(TTor€, "in detail" (Jowett). 

C 8. rrjv dv8p€iav ri 6Q>p.€v ; "How are we to define courage?" 
— lit. "As what are we to set down courage?" The fact that 
temptations, like privations, are spoken of as endured and combated 
(he echoes the ScafiaxofMiviov in 8iafid)(7]v) enables the Ath. to slip 
im23erceptibly from the subject of courage to that of temperance, 
which he thus presents at first as a branch of courage. 

C 9. ttTrAws ovT(i)s : cp. the Homeric fMaxJ/ ovt(jos ; so Pol. 286 e 
evdis oiSrco, Pol. 296 a, 303 d, Phaedr. 234 c vvv ovtios. 

d 2. Kat Ttvas Setras 6o)7reta<s KoA(x/ctKa§, " with all their 
powerful wheedling cajoleries." (Cp. Romeo and Juliet ii. ii. 140 
" a dream too flattering sweet to be substantial.") The rivas 
shows that the word OoyTretas is used metaphorically, and that 
PI. does not mean to add literal flattery as a third assailant of 

222 



NOTES TO BOOK I 633 d 

virtue, in addition to desire and pleasure. — There is a poetical 
redundancy about this expression, a redundancy which is one of 
tlie marks of a hastily written and unrevised work. When an 
idea is first put into shape a number of almost synonymous words 
iiock into the writer's mind, and he sets them all down without 
stojjping to select. Apelt (Jena Jahresbericht 1907) well says that 
in the Laivs we catch Plato at work ; he has not had time to 
polish and arrange his material ; his main anxiety is lest strength 
and life should fail him to get his rich harvest of thought, as 
it were, under cover ; perfect order and precision are not to be 
expected under such circumstances. Badham rewrites the passage 
for him thus : i) kul tt^os ttoOov re Kal r)8ovrjs tlvols Seivas 6^co7r€ta<f 
("deleto inutili KoXaKLKcis"). (Winckelmann and Schanz would 
also reject KoAaKtKcts.) 

d 3. olofxevMv, " who fancy themselves." — K7]pLvov<i : this word 
— which some editors insert before 7roiov(Ttv and some after — is 
J (reserved only in the margins of A and and in Clem. Al. Stro. 
ii. 108. The early vulgate inserted fxaXaTrovcrat after Ov^iov^. 

d4.'oi/Ltat fjAv ovriii is in an erasure in A and is omitted 
in 0. — "Vocabulo ovTia per epexegesin additur Tr/aos ravra ^v/jl- 
TTuvTUj ad quod ex antegressis repetendum cTuaL avryjv StaijA^rjv. 
Sic Sympos. 215a: ^lOKpdrr] 5' tyw eTratveiv ovtws eTrt^^etpT^o-w, 
St' itKoviov" Stallb. Burnet is doubtless right in j^i^itting a 
semicolon instead of a comma after ovroi. 

e 2. rj Kai : we can hardly translate this Kat otherwise than 
^^ also,'' "as well"i; Schanz and Boeckh apparently do so; in that 
case we must make it do duty for the unexpressed fxavov (with tov 
Twv X.\r7rwv t^ttcu). Schanz accepts Boeckh's emendation of the 
MS. KUKhv to KUKLov, wlilch he says is supported by a small 
erasure before the b of KaKov. The /cat in the following words is 
an objection to this. (Ficinus has deteriorem.) 

e 3. The iJ.aX.XoVj which Schanz placed at the Vjeginning of 
Cleinias's speech, formerly stood, in MSS. and edd. alike, as the 
last word of the preceding speech of the Athenian. 

e 5. TOV €7rov€t5tVTo>9 iJTTOva iavTov : the tov with the 
predicate has a deictic force ; it conveys an invidious distinction : 
"it is specially this victim of pleasure, isn't it ? (ttov), that we all 
call self-conquered in the invidious sense." 

6343' 1. o Atbs ovv ktX. : the implication here foreshadowed is 
tliat, if there prove to be a grave defect in the legislation, it can 
be only partially of divine origin. 

a 2. The metaphor in yjioXi'iv is heljjed out by the (^aivnv 

223 



634 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

in avTifSaiveiv. In Septet we have a simple pun : its figurative 
meaning of "shrewd" serves to introduce the following adjectives. 
— Again we have a redundancy of ideas, like that at 633 d 2. 
(Sclianz proposes to omit Ko/xxpa koi, partly because the kol was 
only added by the second hand in A.) 

a 7. diJLcf)OT€pai<s rats TroAecrtv : not a local dative, but in loose 
explanatory apposition to vfxtv ; cp. 638 e 6. — yevovra twv rySovcov, 
" while teaching men how j)leasure tastes." 

a 9. ayovra eis /xecra?, "putting it (pain) in their way." — yueo-as 
and avrcov evidently refer to Awa? : otherwise we should have 
^ dvayKa^ei and Tveidet. ri/xats probably goes only with cVei^ev, 

though the thought of chivalry's " Noblesse oblige " might incline 
us to take it with rjvdyKa^e as well. — The (dependent) question 
breaks off abruptly, and the speaker begins a fresh (independent) 
one at ttov ^t] to express the idea with which he started ; then 
the question is repeated in other words. All this is very con- 
versational in ^tyle. (St. and Jowett make /xecras and avrwv refer 
to 7}Sova§, and translate the two verbs as if they were in the 
present tense.) 

b 1. The j)unctuation here should be avTiov — (Prof. Burnet 
agrees). — ttov 8r] ktA., " Where, I say, has this same enactment 
been made in your laws with reference to pleasure ? " 

C 1. i(T(t)s : it is difficult to be sure whether this means equally 
or perhaps here — the former, I think. In the next line it is 
perhaps. — Kara /xeydXa fJieprj kol 8iacf)avyj, " (instances) on a large 
and striking scale." Kara fJ^epr) means " in detail," " in the 
several parts," as distinguished from KaO' oAov {Tim. 55 e Kara re 
jxkpr] KOL KaO' oAov). Kara fxeydXa fJiepi^ (a phrase which occurs 
also at Philebus 30 b) means lit. in large details ; the addition of 
Kttt 8ia<f)avr] emphasizes the fact that the details, to show the 
design, must not be insignificant, but conspicuous. — evTropoirjv av, 
" I should not be at a loss." 

c 4. ofioLiDs : i.e. as obvious as in the case of institutions 
intended to train men to disregard pain. 

C 5. Kol ovSev ye davfxacTTov ktA. : the connexion of thought 
here, down to 635 b 1, is this : "no actual system is perfect ; not 
yours at Sparta and Crete, any more than ours at Athens. So, in 
our search for perfection, we must none of us feel hurt if 
deficiencies in his native institutions are exposed. We are too old 
for anything like pettishness. Well, it is natural that I should 
know, better than either of you, what fault the world finds, rightly 
or wrongly, with Dorian institutions. Now one of the best of them 

224 



NOTES TO BOOK I 

— among many good ones — is that which regards any criticism of 
the laws, unless made privately by a magistrate or by an old man 
to a contemporary, as sacrilegious. There are no young men here, 
so we may proceed." 

d 5. A,oyos av ere/oos eir] : Ast cps. Arist. Pol. iii. 3 el Se StKatov 
StaXveLV i) fiYj StaXveiVj orav els krcpav fxerafidXXy^ TroXireiav y) 
TToAis, Xoyos erepos. Stallb. adds Plato, Ap. 34 e dXX' el fiev 
OappaXeiDS eyui €)(a> tt/oo? Odvarov rf {xtj, dXXo<s Xoyo'i, npbs 
S* ovv ktX. Similarly R&p. 462 d kol Trepl dXXov otovovv twv 
Tov dvOpiOTTOV 6 avTos Xoyos, and Tim. 54 b Slotl Se, Aoyos TrAeiwv. 
These and other passages (Stallb. cites Dem. Phil. iii. 1 6 and De cor. 
§ 44) support Eusebius's Adyos against the MS. 6 Adyos here, and 
the 8' ovv in the passage from the Apology gives some confirma- 
tion to Bekker'^ 8* ovv, which Schanz and Burnet rightly adopt 
instead of the MS. y' ovv. 

d 7. eiTrep Kat, " if (your laws are good) as in truth they are " ; 
cp. Soph. 238 b eiirep ye kol aAAo tl Oereov ws ov. 

e 1. With e^ €vos o-To/xaros Travras a-v/xcfiwveiv Stallb. cps. Rep. 
364 a TravTes yap e^ evos o-rd/xaTos vp.vovo-iv. 

e 4. With the suggestion of criticism in (rvvvoel (trans.) here cp. 
our similar use of to reflect upon, to think twice about. 

e 6. With TToiela-Oai we may suppose edv to be supplied from d 9. 

635 a. 1. ttTTO)!/ T'jjs Tore Siai/otas : I accept without hesitation 
Burnet's punctuation of this passage, which connects t^s Stavotas 
with diruiv. This word is part of the metaphor in e(TTO\da-dai : 
"though far removed from the old legislator's mind — as far as 
TOTC from vvv — you have hit it. You must be a fxdvTLs." There is 
a confusion between time and space which gives a certain haziness 
to the metaphor. (Schanz wants to bracket d7ru>v.) For the 
gen. Stavoca? cp. Soph. Ant. 1169 lav 8' dirfj tovtcov to ^ai/jetv. . . 

a 4. acfyeiixeS' vtto tov vo/xoderov StaXeyop^evoL . . . p.7]8ev dv 
rrXrjp.p.eXe'iv^ "the lawgiver leaves us free to discuss without 
offence." dv 7rXrjp.p.eXeLv for the simple 7rXr]p.pLeXeiv is an anaco- 
luthon ; perhaps the speaker meant us to feel that StaAeyd/xevot is 
equivalent to el StaAeyot/xe^a. 

a 6. " Kat s.v. A " Burnet. I conjecture that what was originally 
written here was eo^Tt ravra ovtws' Kat p,Y]8ev ye dvfjs — that the 
CKAI, owing to the faintness of the I, the bad formation of the 
K. and of the C was read as EICA. It was seen afterwards that a 
Kat was wanted before p.r]8ev and it was inserted in A above the line. 
(It is a slight confirmation of this that A has not ovtws but ovtio.) 
Schanz omits the Kat. It certainly does not seem necessary if, as 

VOL. I 225 Q 



635 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Ast and Stallb. say, els a means quapropter in the sense of where- 
fore, for which reason. But can it ? The nearest approach I can 
find to this use is Soph Trach. 403 es tl ; " for what purpose ? " 
but " with a view to ivhich " does not suit this passage, (ei's tovto, 
at I Timothy 4. 10, is translated in the A.V. " therefore" but it is 
altered in the RV. to " to this end''). — As against Schanz it may- 
be urged that ye is much more natural after /cat than after els a. — 
F.H.D., omitting koI, proposes to read etra for els a. 

a 7. ov yap TO ye yvdvai n ktA., " it is no disgrace to a man 
to be told of something wrong ; if he is grateful to his critic, 
instead of being indignant with him, it may result in his being 
able to set the wrong right." 

b 2. For TTw Stallb., Schneider, and Schanz accept ttw?, the read- 
ing of a Vienna MS. But the former stands very well here as an 
anticipation of irptv. 

b 3. f3e (SaiiDS : proleptic ; so, Rep. 537 c, a method of ixadrjcrLS is 
said to be ^e/Saios, and Rep. 585 e rJTTov re av dX7]6o)s kol fSef^atois 
7rX7]poiTO. In all these cases it is the result that is fixed and 
definite, not the process by which the result is reached, {(^ef^aios 
is a favourite word with Plato.) We must supply e/aw from above 
with airopdv : " In what I say I shall not find fault ; that can 
only be done after an exhaustive investigation : instead of that I 
will tell you the difficulty I feel about your system." 

C 1. Stot reXovs, " on every occasion." 

C 2. <^ev^eiG-9ai : the paronomasia helps the formal statement of 
the analogy : it is not only pain and alarm that they will run 
away from ; they will run away from those men who have had 
the training which they themselves have missed. 

c 6 — d 1. I would substitute a (,) for the (•) generally found after 
(^o^wv in d 1, because I take el . . . yevqa-ovr at, koX . . . ireicTov- 
rat to be the protasis, and ^ovXeva-ovcri to be apodosis. A 
parallelism thus comes out between the two cases : those untrained 
in fighting fear will (1) flee from the toils and troubles of life, and 
(2) fall before the better trained ; so too those untrained in resist- 
ing pleasure will (1) be worsted by pleasure {ravrov ireio-ovTai 
Tols rjTT. TUiv cfi6l3(i)v)j and (2) will be worsted and overcome by 
the better trained (SovXeva-ova-t ktX.). The Kai before d/xeXerr]- 
TOL then connects yevr'jcrovTai with TretcrovTai, that before fxrjSev 
is epexegetic, inasmuch as fxrjSev rtuv al(T\piov dvayKa^ecrOaL 
TTOietv explains wherein the firmness {Kaprepelv) is shown. I do 
not take y lyvofxevoi with dfxeXerrjroL but with ev rat? rjSovais (this 
I think is certain, and would hold even though it were decided 

226 



NOTES TO BOOK I 635 c 

that it is better to restore the colon at cf)6/So)v, to assume an 
asyndeton between Treto-ovrat and SovXevcrovcrL, and to make the 
K'at before dfieX^TrjTot connect that word with aTretpoL). afxeXerr]- 
TOL== dfieXerrjTOL ovres or 01' ixejxeXeTrjfiivoL^ "not being trained, 
in the presence of pleasure, to show firmness." Cp. Laws 
655 d iv 7rpa.^€(TL re Trai/roSaTrats yiyvofieva Kat rv^^at?. — eVcKa in 
c8 is used much as at Theaet. 148 d irpoOvfXLas /xev eVcKa, & 
^ioKpareSj (^aveirat, and at Polit, 304 a ireipas fxev roivvv €V€Ka 
cf)av€po<i ecrrat : lit. here, " if they are left to their natural inclina- 
tion to indulgence." 

C 8. Ast was the first to remove the comma from after lySoi/as 
and put it after Troteti/ : the sentence is more symmetrical so. 
€V€Ka . . . ySovds corresponds in idea with ytyv. ev r. -qSovah, and 
rjTT. TU}V cf)6/3(i)V with ixrjSiv r. al(T\. dvayK. TroLeiv. — The use of 
yXvKvOvfjLia — like that of yXvKvdv/xos as an epithet of vttvos at 
Ar. Nub. 705, and of "E/)ws at Ar. Lys. 551 — shows the same 
confusion of ideas as our expression " a sweet tooth." 

d 2. €T alcrxiui : the greater disgrace is partly due to the fact 
that men who in this case gain the mastery over them are some- 
times TravTaTracTi KaKoi. In the former case the victors are at all 
events brave men. Also it has been explained at 626 e that to 
ijTTda-dai avTov v(f> kavTov 7rdvT(DV aicr^tcrToi/ re dpia Kal KaKi- 
a-Tov. — One thinks of Hannibal at Capua. 

d 3. Kttt Tots K€KTr]p€V0LS TO, TTepl TO,? r}8ovd<s, " nempc Us qui 
earum rerum domini sunt" Ast. But there is more expressed in 
this idea of mastery than mere power of resistance : the men are 
masters of the whole art or science of pleasure (and are thus able 
to tempt others cleverly), to, irepi rots lySova? is "all that pleasure 
business." For KeKTrjcrdac in the sense of "be master of an art or 
science" cp. Laws 829c twv ovroaot TroLrja-iv /xev Kat pbovcrav 
LKavojs KeKTrjpLevot kv avrots ela-iv. (If the words are taken to 
mean simply " those who have had the advantage of the experience 
of pleasure," they come as a weak climax after or equivalent to 

TOL<S 8vV. KapT€p€iV €V T. 9^8.) 

d 5. rrj /xcv as regards pleasure : rfj 8e as regards pain and fear. 
— (XTrAajg, " without qualification.'' 

d7. Kara t/oottoi/, "recte" ; cp. 638 c, 766 d, Phil. 33 c, Polit. 
310 c, Crat. 425 b, Rep. 581b, Tim. 42 e. (The whole of this 
paragraph is a model of Platonic, i.e. superlatively beautiful and 
accurate, exposition.) 

el. irepl t7j\lkovto)v, "about such weighty matters " ; Theaet. 
162 e cTKOTTci T€ ovv (TV T€ Kul Qe68(i)pos €1 diToSe^ecrOe TriOavo- 

227 



635 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Xoyia re Kai eiKO(rt Trepl TrjXiKovTiDV Xeyofxevovs Aoyovs. — TrcTrt- 
(TTevKevai paStuys = " to be cocksure." 

e 4. Ast and Stallb. insist on taking to /xera ravra as an 
adverbial phrase like to aTro toiVov, and cov, or rather the ante- 
cedent to Siv, as a partitive gen. ; but (1) such a construction as 
that at Phil. 34 c Aeyw fxev tolvvv^ 5 ^(OKpares, t"]8r) to fiera ravra, 
where ro is the object of Aeyw/xev, is much more common in Plato ; 
(2) it is much more natural that the gen. which is the antecedent 
of wv should have something to depend on ; and (3) the singular to 
suits the context better, as being a direct reference to croxppoa-vvrj, 
whereas the antecedent gen. to S)v might be either sing, or plur. 
The only strict parallel to such a partitive gen. as they here 
suppose, cited by Stallb., is at Soph. 232 b aAA' dvaXd/Siofxev 
TrpOtrov Twv irepl rov (rocfucrrrjv elprjfjLeviov, where Burnet accepts 
Heindorf s dvakd/Sdifiev <€v>. 

e 6. Aeyto/xev, " I would suggest that we should talk," or 
" we have got to talk." At 632 e the Ath. had proposed that they 
should take the eTrtrrjSev/jLara of the different virtues one after 
another, and though, as Kitter, following Susemihl, says, they 
have really been discussing crdx^pocrvvr] (disguised as a kind of 
dvSpeca) since 633 d, this is the first time the virtue is introduced 
by name (since the cnixfipoiv \pv)(^rjs e^ts in the enumeration at 631 c). 
This is a rhetorical artifice. Plato wants to show clearly how the 
arguments used about dvSpeta (and the training in it) ajoply equally 
to cr(i)(fipoorvv7]. No doubt also he wishes to bring out the unity 
of virtue. (The — as I take it — superficial inconsistency of calling 
the virtue by two names has been the ground of many attacks upon 
the treatise. The difficulty felt is a real one. Possibly the passage 
from 633 c 8 to 635 e 3 was put in as an afterthought as an alternative 
way of introducing the discussion about a-oycfipocrvvr), I have only 
room here to refer to Doering {ut supra), pp. 28 ff.) — I have adopted 
Badham's fiMv ri for the Tt {ecquid ?) of the earliest editions — 
altered by Stephanus and Ast to ri Seeing the preceding word 
ends in jxev, it is very possible that n^av was omitted in error : 
anyhow it makes the sense clearer to an English reader. (F.H.D. 
suggests that Plato wrote Aeyw • fxQv n.) The Ath. here repeats 
the question already put at 634 b 1. 

e 7. I do not follow Badham in rejecting rj rais — " En purum 
putum recensorem qui genitivos illos a Stdcfiopov pendere non 
intellexit." — I think Plato adopted the unusual r| instead of the 
gen. because his choice would lie between making TroXirevofxeuiov 
agree with TroXiretajv (understood) — and though he often uses ttoXis 

228 



NOTES TO BOOK I 635 e 

as subject to TroAirereo-^at, neither lie, nor prol)a))ly anyone else, 
ever said •>} TroAtreta TroAiTeuerat — and writing such an awk- 
ward phrase as twv twv eiKfj 7roAiTcvo/Aev(ov. Bdh., however, 
apparently, takes iroXLTevofiivoyv as agreeing with TroAtTetwv 
understood. He should at least have given an instance of the 
construction. — With TroAirevo/xevwv we may supply either TroAewv 
or dvOpijoTriov^ preferably the latter. — For r/ after Sta^e/aetv cp. 
Phaedr. 228 d oh €<f)r] SiacficpeLv ra rov epC)VTO<s 17 rot rov jxiq, and 
Jiep. 465 c T7(xvra ravra to twv dv8pu)V yevos SiacfiepovTOiS e^et rj 
TO Tiov yvvatKMV. For the omission of the second €v cp. the 
similarly omitted vtto at Laws 683 e 4 /xwv vtto tlvojv dXXojv t^ 
(Tijiojv avTwv ; — etK>/ : Sparta and Crete had " divinely planned " 
constitutions ; other constitutions were made at random, not on 
any fixed principle — like the codes described at 630 e, made by 
the lawgivers of the day. 

636a. 1. wcTTrep TO, irepi tov 7roAe/zov vvvSq : i.e. "as (we did 
find some superiority) in the case of dvSpeia just now." 

a 2. ov paStov : supply, not with Stallb. etVeti/ but, dvevpta-Kecv. 

a 3. Trpos a/x^OT€/oas : "int. Tr]v dvSpecav et tyjv croxfipocrvvr^v. 
Male interpretes ad civitates trahunt," Ast. 

a 4. €OLK€v . . . ytyvea-Oai, " it does seem difficult for such 
things as institutions to be as clearly beyond dispute in action 
as in their intention" — in other words, "it is hard to get 
institutions that are as satisfactory in action as they are in 
theory." Ast is doubtless right (pace Stallb.) in taking dvaficfucrfSYj- 
Tryrws as equivalent to the adjective — so Laivs 968 b tls Se 6 
TpoTTO'^ rj/xtv ytyvd^evos d/a^w? yiyvoiT av, i?ep. 504 c /MiTpov twv 
TOLOVTiov drroXiLTrov kol otlovv tov oVto? ov irdw ^er/aiw; 
yiyverat — though I do not think he is right in taking to ircpl 
To.'s TToAiTcia? as an adverbial phrase — " circa civitates" — Rather 
it is the subject of yiyvea-Oai. (This is better, I think, than 
taking to with yiyvea-Qat.) With Ast's construction " a man," or 
" a lawgiver " would presumably have to be supplied as the subject 
of yiyv(.crBaL. His translation of the whole is: "circa civitates s. 
h'ges ita certum esse, h.e. tam certas leges (quae nihil controversiae 
vel dubitationis habeant) statuere, ut res ipsa, s. eventus respondeat 
legislatoris consilio." 

a 6. Ktv^vvevet yap ktA. : the parallel is adequately suggested, 
but the expression of it is not complete, — not even logical — the 
KaOdirep eV toU (jMixacrtv has no right to be where it is. — This 
informality may be intentional (i.e. a dramatic representation of 
a hasty conversational style), or it may be due to hasty writing 

229 



636 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(the informal ev w and tlie rot rjfxiov crw^ara coming after the tV 
crw/xa point to the latter cause). — Schanz brackets KaOdirep kv rots 
(TiofjLaaLV, Ast reads o for €v w. 

a 7. TL Trpos €v (Tcofia : a variety for Trpos eV n crw/xa. — eTrcT'i]- 
Sevfjia, " treatment." — ei/ w ovk av cfiaveit] we might translate, 
" without finding that . . ." 

b 1. eTTci, "for instance"; Prot. 319 e e-et HepiKki^s, "P. for 
instance." 

b 3. xaAcTTtt, "are a danger." (Cp. Polit. 274 b Bi^pioiv ocra 
^(aAtTra ras (jiva-ea ?]v). — 7rpo§ : lit. "m </ig direction of" — "are 
dangerously liable to produce." The young men of the cities 
named were "spoiling for a fight," because they were so highly 
trained. Arist. Pol. v. 7, in sj)eaking of a (TTdcns at Thurii, sets it 
to the account of yevofievot rives TroXe/JUKol tiov vecure/acov. Cp. 
Alcidamas, Odysseus p. 184, 1. 19 ov8' kv TraXatcrTpa ov8' kv 
a-vfJL7ro(Ti(i), kvOa (faXei epiSas TrAeiVra? Kal XoiSopias yevea-dai. 
Grote chap. Ixv. gives reason for thinking that the revolution at 
Miletus, described by Plut. Lys. 8, was not due to political 
differences. The Boeotians are well known to have regarded 
bodily training as a more important part of education than the 
training of the mind. 

b 4. Kol 8r) Kal introduces the next, and more weighty, charge 
against the yy/xvacria — a charge often brought by ancient writers. — 
This whole passage, down to 8t€<^^apKevat, presents great diffi- 
culties. According to Burnet the original reading of A (and 0) 
was TraAatoi/ vo/xov, corrected by the writer — (I examined the 
passage in A and thought it was by a later hand) — to TraAatwv 
vofxiiiv : a later hand altered the w's back to o and wrote vofxifiov 
as a variant for vofxov in the margin. After kmr-q^ev pia follow 
the words koI Kara (f)va-tv ras tt. t. dcf). rjSovds. Two minor MSS. 
omit the Kai, which seems to me likely to have been introduced 
by some scribe who took Kara ^vctlv as going, along with TraAato^, 
to qualify vopiov, and took vopiov as in apposition to ras irepl 
rd d(f)po8L(TLa ijSovds. This last view I think a mistake. The 
rjSovat are cfivcrei as opposed to vopao, and the force of the passage 
seems weakened if they are spoken of as a vopLos. I have therefore 
accepted Boeckh's wdXai ov vd/xt/xov, and Ast's ras Kara f^vcriv 
77€pl rd dcf)p. rjSovds. Most decidedly ov p,6vov dvBpiJoTrwv dXkd 
KOL Oyjptiov goes with (fiva-tv. Stallb. oddly says it is a " hyper- 
bolical " strengthening of the charge against the yi;/xvao-ta, that 
the mischief they wrought extended to animals, quoting Laws 
942 d, where dvap^ia is spoken of as extending to the brutes. 

230 



NOTES TO BOOK I 636 b 

The position of the genitives is a little awkward, but any other 
position in tlie sentence would be more awkward. — " Then again 
this usage, where it is an institution of long standing, is thought 
to have corruj^ted the sense of pleasure, attendant on ra af^ipo^LcrLa, 
which is natural to the whole animal creation." With the TraAatov 
yofxtixov of L and A^ cp. Athen. xiv. p. 633 b KaTay^jpaardvTwv 
(T\€Sov aTrdi'Tiov twi' dp^atojv vopLifxiav. 

b 7. Tts, " public opinion." 

C 1. etre Trai^ovTa etre (nrov^d^ovTa kvvoelv Set ra rotaura : 
tlie elfect of this parenthesis is somewhat as follows : " the comic 
poet, if you will let him, will tell you as readily as the philo- 
sopher." 

C 4. uTToSeSoo-^ai, " to be yielded " or " produced." 

C 6. Koi Twv 7r/)(oTCDV TO ToXfirjfx €ivaL 8l uKparciav y]Sovrj<i : 
at tirst sight this seems to mean : " and that the audacity of the 
original perpetrators is due to intemperance in pleasure." But 
it is hard to see why this self-evident remark should be made only 
about the first perpetrators of the enormity, and still harder 
to understand the present etvai, especially after aTroSeSocr^at. 
Besides, 8l' aKp. 178. makes an awkward predicate to e^vat. I cannot 
help thinking that twv TrpcoTiov has a kind of adverbial force — 
" prominently " — and that the sentence meant " and that the 
audacity is in an especial degree due to unbridled lust." Just 
such a use of irpwros may be seen at Phil. 44 e irpos rd irpdra 
fxeyWei. — aKpareta yjSovoiv re Kal eTridvjjLLiov occurs at Laws 
886 a, aKparelai rjSovuyv kol AvttoJi/ at 908 c, St' aKpdTetav rj8ovii)v 
Kal Ai-TTWv at 934 a, and lySovwv aKpdreia at Tim. 86 d. 

d 1. 0)9 XoyoTTOirjcrdvTOiV tovt(i)v : cp. above on 624 a 7. 
This variant for the ace. c. inf. construction expresses the 
charge made against the Cretans : tovtcdv is emphatic — " that it 
was they who invented the story." After a conversational break — 
the asyndeton is well marked by Burnet's colon after rovTOiv — 
follows, as an amplification of the charge, what all the world 
supposed to be the reason of the invention : irpocrreOy^Kkvat thus 
depends on a verb of saying or thinking supplied from 
KaTi^yopovp,€v. 

d 3. 7rpo(TT€drjK€vaL : i.e. rots vo/xots. — Kara, " to the dis- 
advantage of," as at Ap. 37 b Kar' efxavrov epetv avros. — 
S7) " as they would have us believe." — The Kai in d 4 points 
the same way as the irpocr- : they followed Zeus's injunctions 
in the laws ; they followed (they said) his example in the vice, 

d 4-e 3. " Be that as it may, our topic suggests to us two con- 

231 



636 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

siderations which go to the foundations of the philosophy of law : 
(1) What pleasures ought not to be sought ? (2) What pains 
ought not to be avoided ? " These weighty words illuminate the 
whole treatise on laws which follows. Whether the lawgiver is 
enjoining or prohibiting, giving honour or fixing a penalty, his 
^TTLG-T-^fjirj is shown in his power to answer these two questions. 
Nature provides the raw material in the form of the emotions of 
pleasure and pain ; the educator of states and individuals moulds 
it by the habits which his laws and institutions induce. (See 
below 727 c 1-5 for an instance of the legislator's application of 
this principle.) 

d 5. a.vdpio7r(x)v is emphatic ; the myth dealt with superhuman 
beings. 

d 7. eV T€ TToAecrtv Kal kv 18lol<; -t^OecTLV : Stephanus was the 
first of modern interpreters to write -qdecnv (A L O) for the Wea-iv of 
the inferior MSS. and the received text, — apparently as a conjec- 
ture of his own, and Stallb. follows him in interpreting the word 
to mean " abodes" ace. to its old poetical use. It is certainly so 
used at 865 e, which Stallb. quotes, but it there stands in tlie 
vague sense of " haunts" not in that of houses, which he gives it 
here. Besides it is not cities, or houses or families, but the in- 
stitutions and constitution of the TroAis on the one hand, and the 
habits and character of the tStcoT^y? on the other, that are here in 
question, and it is best to take " cities and men's characters " here 
as short for that. One half of the compound notion is mentioned 
in the first member of the comparison, and the other half in the 
second. 

e 2. ((^ov airav : very possibly under these words he included 
not only individual animals, but the universe ; an organism, 
which, like human communities, had its laws — the ^wov eV oparov 
of Timaeus 30 d. 

e 4 — 637 b 6. To the height of this philosophical argument 
Megillus cannot rise, though he expresses polite admiration. 
He takes refuge in the practical consideration that you don't see 
the drunkards about Sparta that you see at Athens and elsewhere. 

e 6. 8oK€t fxoi used impersonally, followed by ace. c. inf. is rare. 
— The TO added to rj8ova<i (fievyeiv expresses the fact that the in- 
junction to avoid indulgence had been under consideration before 
(i.e. at 635 b 6). 

e 7. 8iaK€\ev€(T6aL is a sort of historic present. "(I'm no 
philosopher) but it is clear to me that the Lacedaemonian lawgiver 
is right in that injunction of his to shun pleasure." 

232 



NOTES TO BOOK I 6366 

e 8. fSorjd/ja-ei, " will take the field." (It is a pity that the 
dictionaries do not give this as the primary meaning instead of 
" assist.") 

637 a 1. kciAAio-t' dvOpcoTToyv : see above on 629 a 6. 

a 2. For ov (which depends on rjSovah) Ast suggested vcfi ov, 
and Schanz actually prints 8l ov ; but ov suits the vagueness of 
the antecedent better than 8t ov. tovto is explained a little 
further down to be a-v/xTrocna and (to,) tovtols crvvcnofxeva — the 
licence and exhilaration attendant on set occasions for drinking. 

a 3. dvoLa: the schol. on Arist. Nuh. 418 throws light on the 
associations of this word : avoyyrwv rwv ac^/aoSto-itov, Trj<; rotai;- 
Ti]<i Xayveia^. to yap dvoT]Tatv€tv to Slo. fjnopatveiv to a<^po- 
^Lcnd^eiv eXeyov. Cp. Eur. Androm. 674 yvvacKa pnapa'tvovdav. 

a 5. ocrwv ^Tra/DTtarats /-teAei, " with which Spartans are con- 
cerned," i.e. for which they are responsible. 

b 1 f . Kttt ovT MSS. ; KoX ovS' Schweighauser on Athenaeus 
iv. p. 43, where this passage is quoted, and where for XvcraiTo we 
find pva-aiTo^ which I have adopted. Those who read pvaatTo 
evidently took Atovva-ia as its subject, and made €)(^ovt' nom. 
in agreement with it (so Stallb.). Those who read Awatro prob- 
ably took oo-Tt? as its subject, and cxovt' as ace. masc. sing, (so 
Ast in his edition, though apparently in his Lexicon he takes 
€\ovt' to be nom. neut. pL). The former view is supported by 
the only other instance of Trpof^aanv 's.yetv in Plato {R&p. 469 c) 
where it means to provide an excuse. 

b 2. iocnrep €v dfxd^ai^ elSov : the object of etSov in the mind 
of the speaker would probably be Kw/xa^ovras rtvas /zera /xe^r^s (so 
Ast). For ev d/xot^ais Ast quotes schol. on Lucian, Ad lov. 
Tragoed. § 44 ev tjj kopTrj tmv Atovi;o-i(ov irapa tols 'A6yjvatOL<s kirX 
dfjia^iov KaOrjfievoi €(TK(i)7TT0V dWyjXovs koI iXoiSopovvTO TroAAa. 
TrapoLp-ia ovv iKpdT'qcrev eTrt tiov vf^pta-TLKOis xpinpikviiiv to 
6^ dfxd^ri<s. 

b 3. Kat €V TapavTL 5e Trapd tols rjfjLeT€poL<s (XTTOtKots : is Plato 
here slyly putting an argument for the Athenians into Megillus's 
mouth ? The Dorian, like a too strictly brought up child, when 
released from the rigid Spartan discipline, runs to excess in 
indulgence. — Juvenal calls Tarentum ^'■madidum." 

b 7. €7ratv€Ta /xev . . . fSXaKiKiDTepa, " all indulgence in 
pleasure is good where there goes with it a power of saying * no ' ; 
where that power is weakened the man is a fool." 

C 1. yap, " no doubt." — crov Xdf^oiT dv : XafSea-Oat Ttvbs is 
" to lay hands on a man " — cp. Gory. 486 a et tls crov Aa/?o/x€vos . . . 

233 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

€i<s TO Sea-fXMTi^pLov oLTraydyoL — the Latin prehendere. Here it is 
used in the figurative sense of the Latin reprehendere. — twv Trap 
rjficov a/xwoyueros : this Stallb. translates " nostra instituta de- 
fendens." This would no doubt be right if, with Schanz, we 
adopted the Aldine alteration of the MS. rjfxojv to rj/Jicv. At 
Symp. 219 a ra Trap kpLov means "what I have to say," i.e. "what 
comes from me." At Soph. 265 d we have avev twv Trap rjfxiov 
Aoywv, and at 251 d cv toU Trap y^jxlv Adyots with the same slight 
difference. — It will be seen that in our passage it is much more 
likely that rwj/ is masc, and that d/jivvofxevos is used (as it often is) 
absolutely ("in self-defence") as at Laws 731b, where also it is 
subordinate to another participle vtKwvra (as SeLKvvs is here 
to it). Tts Tiov Trap r)p,cov then is " a man from (or ' on ') our 
side " — an Athenian. 

(b 7-(i 5.) The connexion of ideas in this passage is this : 
" Liberty to indulge is good, but not licence. Foreigners, though, 
are not good judges in the matter. What they take to be licence 
is often only a liberty to which they are not accustomed. But 
let us not waste time in condemning or justifying each other ; the 
only man who is before our tribunal is the lawgiver ; and it will 
help us in our judgement of what is good or bad in law if we 
review carefully the whole question of the effect of wine and the 
regulation of indulgence in it." We are thus launched on a subject 
which occupies the rest of Book I., and is not finally dismissed 
till the end of Book II. In the course of its investigation we are 
introduced to the relation of v6po<^ and the voixoOeT7]s to TracSeta. 

C 4. aTroXvecrOai, "absolve" (sc. roiavra eTTtTT^Sev/Aara). The 
fjLT] which follows it is the same jjirj that we had at 635 a 5 after 
a(/)€i/xe^a (cp. Thuc. i. 128. 3 aTreXvOy^ /xry dSiKeiv) : the addition 
of the Tov (cp. Xen. Hel. iv. 8. 5 tovtov<s a^ rocavTa Atywv eo■;^(e 
Tov /xt) iKTr€TrXrj\6aL) and of the dAA* opOw'S make it seem 
stranger than usual to us. 

d 3. €TL yap ovv €i7ra>/>t€v TrAetw, " I really should like to say 
more still." For yap ovv used in this way cp. Phaedr. 24:1 c 
roXpLTjTkov yap ovv to ye dXy]6\<i etTretv. 

d 4. Trept aTrda-i^s /xW-qs : the explanation that follows {Xcyio 
8' ktX.) shows that piWr) is not used here in the sense of strong 
drink, but in that of ehriety. We must remember that the Greeks 
drank nothing stronger than wine, and nearly always drank that 
mixed with water, and hence that the word fxWrj had not the 
disgusting connotation that its equivalent has among us. The 
effect of drinking wine — especially that of drinking more wine 

234 



I 



NOTES TO BOOK I 637 d 

than was necessary to quench the thirst — was noticeable — it is 
described below, 645 d and e — but the degree of mental and 
physical incapacity that was associated with the word ixWrj and 
its cognates fxeOeveiv and ihOvo-tikos was not so great as that 
associated with our words drunk and intoxication. — o-jXiKpoVj 
^^insignificant, immaterial^ The meaning of ov (r/x. is helped by 
the following statement that it takes a wise lawgiver to decide 
how the practice is to be regarded. 

d 6. TO TrapoLTrav (" at all ") and y) jjlt] are both used with the 
verbal noun just as they would be used with a verb. 

e 3. TTavTOLTraa-i qualifies OLKpaTio. — ywat/ce? re Kal avTOi : the 
emphatic position of the word y watKc? suggests that Greek women 
drank less wine than men. Xen. De rep. Lac. i. 3 says that 
at Sparta the young women were allowed either no wine or only 
wine mixed with much water. 

638 a 1. In A and all other MSS. the words w Awo-re form the 
last words of the Athenian's previous speech. According to 
0. Immisch {Phil. Stud, zu Plato ii. p. 51) there is in the margin 
of L (Stallb.'s Flor. 6) a note which says that a certain iraTpidp^ov 
jSi/SXiov contained a correction which made these words begin 
Megillus's speech. Ast made the same correction independently. 
Who the TraTpLapxTjs was, whose copy of Plato contained this and 
several other corrections of the text of the Laws (see Immisch 
ut supra), is not known. — For the Se ye cj). Porson's notes on 
Orestes 1234 and Medea 814. In the former he says, " Ubi 
persona secunda prioris sententiam auget aut corrigit, post 8e modo 
interposito, modo non interposito alio verbo, sequitur particula 
ye." Burnet remarks, at the end of the preface to voL v., that 
many alterations in the text of the Laivs are due to a corrector 
who imagined that /xev, Se or ovv could not stand anywhere in a 
sentence except in the second place. Hence, probably, the dis- 
location of the (S Xwcrre here. 

a 4. dT€Kp.apTOL, " inexplicable, mysterious, of obscure origin." 
Ast puts too much into the word in explaining it to mean 
" in quibus nullum indicium inest virtutis vel pravitatis." This 
notion is added in the following words. 

a 5. opov, ^^ criterion" as above at 626 b 7. 

a 6. VLKrjv re Kal ^rrav Aeyovres iJ.d)(r]S, " if we declare it to 

be victory or defeat in battle." — For the epexegetic participial 

clause cp. Rep. 331 e rt <^>)s rov 'ZifxioviSrjv Aeyovra 6p6o)S Aeyeiv 

-€pl SiKaiocrvvT]<s ; It was felt to be rather strange here because 

f the antecedent tovtov. Hence AeyovTcs was altered by some 

235 



638 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

to ^AeTTorre?. Stephanus mentions this reading : it is reported 
to have been in the margin of Voss's MS., and Ficinus translates 
"si ad victoriam belli fugamque respexerimus." This unnecessary 
alteration is sufficiently condemned by the fact that /^AcTretv, in 
the sense of respicere {ad), is always intransitive in Plato (i.e. 
followed by a prep.). (At Tim. 51c it is trans, in the sense 
of to see with the bodily eyes, and at Charm. 172c in the sense of 
look for, seek ; cp. Heindorf ad loc.) 

a 7. The eTretS-/^ clause goes closely with the previous words. — 
I have put a colon after /J-dx'q's (as Schanz), also a comma after 
fiaxofievat, removing the one usually put after KaTaSovXovvTaL 
(which is a " historic " present). (? eiret Sr) yap.) This arrange- 
ment assumes for yap almost the force of " for instance." 

b 2. AoKpovs : for the early history of lawless Locri and its 
wonderful conversion by Zaleucus cp. e.g. Grote ch. xxii. As to 
its later evvo/xia cp. Pind. 01. ix. 17, and x. 15, Plato, Tim. 20 : 
for its conservatism cp. Dem. G. Timocr. 744. — The defeat of the 
Locrians by a Syracusan force, here referred to, is probably that 
inflicted on them by Dionysius the younger in 456 B.C., when he 
had to flee from Syracuse. He had to fight with the Locrians for 
the possession of the citadel. If this is so we have a terminus a quo 
for the composition of the Laws (see below on 7 1 1 e 5). — Cean 
laws and Cean morals were proverbially excellent. Nothing 
seems to be known of the circumstances of Ceos's subjection 
to Athens. 

b 4. avTov €Kd(rTov : i.e. taking them in fullest detail, and 
examining them minutely. 

b 7. irpojTov B' ktX. : having dismissed the notion that the 
most powerful nations must needs have the best laws, the Ath. 
warns his hearers that no custom or practice ought to be praised 
or blamed without a careful consideration of the circumstances 
of the case. 

C 2. Aoyo) Xa^ovres : I think Stallb. is right, as against Ast, 
in taking this to mean discuss (verbally), rather than reflect upon 
(mentally). The word p-qOkv and the ev Toh Aoyocs of d 1 make 
somewhat for this view. 

C 3. TrpoOifxevoL : rather more than propose here ; it is ^^who set 
out to, make up their minds to.^' — evdvs prjdev : cp. Theaet. 186 b 
€v6v<S yevofJievoLS. 

C 4. For Kara TpoTrov cp. on 635 d 7. 

c 5. I have followed Ast and Schanz in adopting Cornarius's 
correction of the MS. Trvpovs to Tvpov<s. C. quotes from 

236 



NOTES TO BOOK I 638 c 

Hippocrates Kal /xrj aTrXw? ovtcd 8ok€€lv otl irovt^pov (^pQtjxa 
Tvpos. For those who retain the reading Trvpov^^ the e^ovra in 
c 8 presents a special difficulty, rvpo^ might be used in either 
the sing, or the plur., but the singular rrvpovj which would have 
to be supplied with e'xovra, would not be natural Greek. As an 
article of food they always spoke of -jrvpoi or KpiSaL 

C 6. avTov : i.e. tov /Spioixaros. — epyaa-ta is the operation, effect. 
Stallb. cps. Prot. 353 d Kara rrjv avrrj'^ Trj<s rjSovrjs Trjs Trapaxpi^fxa 
kpyacTiav. 

C 7. 7rpocr<f>opd, " the application." — The following relative 
clauses explain the word Trpocrcfiopdv — more particularly is the inf. 
7rpo(r<f)€peLv epexegetic of iTpoG-(j>opdv : — I have not followed Schanz 
in adopting Madvig's athetesis of this inf. Such an epexegetic 
inf. is just possible in the Laws. If an emending copier had 
inserted anything, he would, I think, have inserted Trpocrcfiepetv 
Sei, which is the reading of two inferior MSS. according to Stallb. 
— The points to be observed about the application of the diet are 
the manner of the application, the choice of recipients, the 
concomitant treatment, the state of the food, and the state of the 
recipients. 

d 2. ToorovTov fiovov : i.e. only the bare word fxedr]. 

d 4. A has €7raLvovfi€v alone, L and O have )(^p(jofi€voL 
€77aLvovfjL€v. Bocckh ejected €7raivov/xev, Schanz, rejecting xpijjfjievot, 
writes eiraKoXovdovpiev for eTraivovixev. I follow Boeckh, and 
also bracket kol after €k. I can hardly believe that cTratveti/ in 
these circimistances, in two consecutive lines, could have been 
used first in the sense of praise as opposed to blame, and then in 
the sense of hack an opinion, whether favourable or unfavourable. . 
I conjecture the original text to have been : /xapTvcnv yap Kal 
eTrati/erats \p(ji)fMevoL cKarepoi, ol fiev, otl ktX., and that eiraLvovfxev 
was written in the margin of some copy, by a scribe who thought 
a verb ought to be supplied : when ctt. got into the text, it became 
necessary to add a Kal after eKarepoi. In any case the meaning is 
clear. The philosopher must not be content with the verdict of 
numbers, or with that of experience : he must go behind both, like 
the scientific doctor in the case of diet mentioned above. Both of 
us, says the Ath., are on the wrong tack : 7, in appealing to 
numbers, you, in appealing to the witness of results. 

d 5. KvpLov : decisive — something that will settle the matter. 

d 6. avTw : i.e. olvio; "vino abstinentes" Ficinus. 

d 7. TovTo : the last -mentioned argument from experience. 
I'jixiv is probably the Atk, but it may be the whole company. 

237 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

According as we decide this point, we shall decide between v/jllv 
and yj/JAv in e 5. 

e 3. irepl avTov tovtov, rrjs jJieOrjs : a bold and emphatic 
variant for irepl avr^? rrjs fiedy]^. — Treupiofievos av apa Svvw/xat : 
we should begin a fresh sentence here, " And I hope that in so 
doing I may be able to show " etc. 

e 4. opdrjv fieOoSou : i.e. the discussion is to be a lesson in logic. 

e 5. yjfJiLV A, v/xLV Hug ; see above on d 7. — Trept avrtov : i.e. 
irepl airavroiv rwv TotovToyv, about all customs and institutions, not 
about pWr] alone. It is not only on one subject that you will 
find yourselves (you, Spartans and Cretans) in the minority, and 
it will be as well for you to know how to answer attacks. 

e 6. Some editions read rj/xlv here, on no MS. authority. 

639 a 2. For 8-q L has Se, and for ttt] TjjSe Ast would read the 
more usual rySe ttt], an unwarrantable alteration. 

a 5. Kat where we should say or. 

a 6. Twi/ KaKU)v MSS. ; Eusebius and Theodoret, in quoting this 
passage, omit the article. Cp. below c 4. tlvmv KaKiov Herm. 

a 7. vyi€s Kal oTLovv : an interrogative form of the very 
common ovSev vyth, used much as we use the (conversational) 
rotten and rot^ sometimes of the morally unsound, sometimes of 
the nonsensical. The neuter is used adverbially here as ace. 
of the inner object ; so \py](TT6v tl ^e^etv c 6. 6 tolovtov xj/oyos 
ovSev vyih xj^eyet would be "such a man's blame sounds ridiculous." 
— rjyM/xeOa MSS., rjyov/xeOa Eusebius. Ast notes that the 
MSS. not infrequently change a pres. to a deliberative subj. ; 
cp. c 5 below. 

a 9. The mention of KaKol apxovT€<s leads naturally to the 
consideration of the \p7](rTo<s apx^ov, itself a step towards that of 
the due ordering of crvinrocria. 

b 1. oSv, a mere ghost here, as far as its illative force goes, 
serves the euphony of the sentence, by obviating the jingling 
av T€ vavTi^ av re fiiq, 

b 6. Kav Stephanus, Kal MSS. 

b 7. Schanz agrees with Cobet in thinking that ws has dropped 
out before vtto p.€Orj<s ; but, as Ritter says, though this is palaeo- 
graphically possible, the comparison of 649 d 6 iravd' oVa St* 
i^SovtJs ccv jxeOvcTKovTa Trapdcfypovas Trotet shows that the metaphor 
could be used without such an introduction. Besides, would not 
Plato in that case have said ws vtto jxW-qs utto tov (fiofSov ? Ast 
cps. Gritias 121 a pedvovre^ viro TpvffiTJs. 

b 10. To clear our ideas the Ath. introduces us to a "right- 

238 



NOTES TO BOOK I 639 b 

down bad " ruler as well as to a good, and to a moderately 
bad one. 

b 11. (TcfioSpa yvvaLKOiv : so we find an adverb without an 
article qualifying a noun in Theaet. 183 e Trdvv irpecr^vTrjSy Dem. 
De f. leg. 385 apStju oXeOpos, Thuc. i. 122 avrtK/avs SovActai/, ii. 47 
cfiOopd ovTiO'i, Aescli. Cho. 929 Kapra /xai/rt?, Xen. Hell. vi. 2. 39 
pdXa (TTpaT7]y6vy Ar. Nuh. 1120 dyav eTrofJLJSpLa. These are all 
adverbs of measure ; but we also find /xarryv ko/jlttos (Hdt. vii. 103), 
X.oyd8Y]v XiOovs (Thuc. iv. 4), ^va-raSov fxdxats (Thuc. vii. 81), 
fxdTrjV X6yo<5 (Eur. Ion 275). 

C 1. T6 6' iiratveT-qv y) \p€KTr]v ; the olofxeda in c 5, which picks 
up the broken thread of the construction, shows us what verb 
we have to supply here. So at Soph. 266 c rt 8e tyjv rjjuieTepav 
rexvrjv ; the following (f)-qcrofX€v shows that Xeyofxev has to be 
understood: so at Phaedr. 264b tl 8e raAAa; where raAAa is 
nom. with Sokcl (which soon follows) understood. — From fj we 
must supply mentally a r) to be the subject of (hff)€\Lfi6<s eo-rti/, 
while the 6 Se fx. eop. ecrj goes on as if €t tl<s kiraLvoirf had gone 
before. The style all through this passage is conversational, but 
the sense is clear. As another person (the dp^iav) has been 
mentioned since the eTratveTT;?, the demonstrative use of the 6 8e 
is quite idiomatic. It is diificult to see why Stallb. thought the 
passage " turpiter corrupta" or how he mends it by writing os 8r) 
for 6 Se. — The introduction of the word KOLViovta, which is quite 
legitimate as a general term including such communities as a flock 
of goats, or an army, leads up to the consideration of the crvfjLTroa-ia 
which follows. — KOLV(DVtav avrrjv avTrj KOLV(ovov(Tav is, as Stallb. 
says, " eleganti quodam lusu dictum." 

C 3. The fxii^Te . . . 8e is again *'free," but perfectly idiomatic. 
Cp. H 433 ly/xos 8' ovT dp TTii) -qios, eVt 8' d/xcfiLXvKrj vv^, 
Soph. Phil. 1312 OS fxerd ^(jdvtcdv 6' or tjv tJkov aptcrra, vvv 8e 
Twv TedvqKOTuyv, Eur. Suppl. 223 XP^^ y^P ^^'T^ orcofiaTa d8iKa 
StKatots Tov cro(j>bv (rvfi/niyvvvaL, €v8aip.ovovvTas 8^ els 86ijlovs 
KToia-OaL cfytXov^. 

c 4. There is a good example here in A of the way in which a 
writer's eye and hand may play him ia]^e. The first hand of A 
wrote dvapxovrcov in the place of dvapxov rj fxerd KaKiov dpxovToyv : 
A- supplied in the margin the missing -xov rj fxerd KaKwv dp- 
which his eye had skipped the first time. After writing the 
letters dvap- his eyes, on returning to his exemplar, went to the 
dp- in dpxovTiov. 

c 5. olojxeda is the reading of Eusebius and of A^, elsewhere it 

239 



639 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

is oLiofxeOa ; cp. above on a 7. — For the Snj of A and Eiis., O has 
av : A- has aVj and 0^ 8rj. — In the change jfrom the sing. (6 8e) to 
the plural in ^ew/jois we have the last of the conversational irregu- 
larities spoken of above. — For eTraivecreo-^at Eus. has eTraLvetcrdaL. 

C 7. TTws 8 av (i.e. oloLfxeda) : this av may have given rise to 
the av suggested as a variant for 8i] in c 5. 

d2. e'xe Srj (cp. 627 c 3): Heindorf on Gorg. 460 a says, 
" mihi vox '^xetv in hac quoque formula, ut saepe alias, inhihendi 
et suhsistendi vi accipienda videtur " — somewhat, i.e., like our 
familiar "wait a bit." At Ion 535b e^e 8ri fxot roSe etVe, how- 
ever, and possibly here, e^e 8i^ seems to be used just with the 
force of ay€ 8-^. A phrase so commonly used in conversation 
must have lost some of its original significance. 

d 6. oTj8e7r(o7rore : as Stallb. says, kd^adacrde (not ededcraTO tis) 
must be supplied here. 

d 9. 8tr}p(x)Tr]Ka : this word is always used elsewhere in Plato 
with a personal object (though at Phil. 57 c it is not expressed) in 
the sense of to question^ put to the question ; here it means 
" inquire into," " examine." — cos eVos etVeiv qualifies Trdcras ; cp. 
Adam on Ap. 17 a and Rep. 341 b. — oAryv fiev . . . /xopta 8' et 
TTov . . . rd TToXXd 8e, " I have never seen or heard of one that 
was as it should be throughout, and though I may have seen 
insignificant parts that were proper here and there, still I may 
say I found the majority of them altogether at fault." In to. 
TToAAa and avfjbTravTa we have the same change to the neut. as 
that noticed on 638 e 3. 

e 5. -qfjieis fjikv yap ktX. : a polite way of hinting disbelief in 
the existence of such a thing as a " projjer " a-v/xTroa-iov. — evOvs^ 
" at first sight." 

640 a 4. TO fih' : demonstrative, ^Hhis much you do know, 
don't you?" — €v . . . Kotvwi/tats 7rpd^€0)V wvrtvwvovv, "in any 
kind of concerted action." 

a 5. €Kd(TTOis agrees in sense with the individual members of 
which the companies spoken of are composed ; we should translate 
" for each set of people." Travraxov is " in all cases" i.e. in every 
sort of company. « 

a 11. Twv SetAwv : " frequentissime Graeci asingulari collective 
Tel infinite posito ad pluralem transeunt" Ast, who ops. 853 d 
fjj'q TLS kyylyvqrai . . os . . . ovroi . . . ytyviJiVTai. 

b4. TravTt Tpoirc^ as at Theaet. 148 d, "at all costs." 

b 6. vvv 8e ye . . (fiLXocf)po(Tvvr]<s : the connexion betweenj 
aTparoirk8ov and dp^ovTOs is so close that the fact that crTpaTOTreSoi 

240 



NOTES TO BOOK I 640 b 

has come before irept makes it easy to interpose Xeyo/xev between 
TrepL and ap^ovTOs. The nearest approach to this arrangement 
among the parallels cited by Ast is 697 c 17 Hepartov Trepl StacrKc^i? 
TTJs TToAiTcias ; he also cps. 676 c 6, 691 b 2, 834 d 3. It is difficult 
to know whether (TTparoirk^ov was felt as a gen. dependent on 
a noun {ap^ovros being a slight, though significant, modification 
of ap\ovTos) or as governed by a part, of the verb apx^tv. — 
ex^pols is governed by the verbal noun 6fMLX.LaL<5 (cp. 631 d 3). 
— ofxiXLais is plural, I suppose, because it takes two armies to 
make a battle. — (Against Badham's rewriting of this sentence 
— (TTparr^yov Trept Aeyo/xev ap^ovTos dv8pC)v o/xtAt'ag — there 
are at least two strong objections : (1) what can have been 
the motive for changing so simple a construction into a 
very complex one? (2) whereas, in the version in the text, 
ap^ovTos goes equally well with l\6pMv and with (JjiXcdv, 
(TTpaTrjyov will not go with both. The sentence as we have it 
seems to me quite in the style of the Laws. — Ficinus translates 
"non de exercitu nee imperaturo." Hence Schanz reads ov8' 
a/o^ovTo?. -^Burnet says A does read ap^ovros, not, as Sch. says, 
ap^ovres.) 

b 8. elpi'^vr] and cfaXofjipocrvvr] (peace and goodwill) have already 
been mentioned together at 628 c 10. 

C 2. ovK dSopv^os : i.e. somewhat of a chaos, and therefore 
needing, more than anything, an dpx(t)v. 

c 3. Cleinias's very ready assent, here and in his next four 
answers, to any suggestion of a fault that may be found with a 
(TvfXTroirioVj shows him still incredulous. 

c 4. Kttt Toi>Toi<s : this company, as well as the other company 
(of soldiers) spoken of above. 

C 6. dOopvfSov, " orderly." 

C 9. Trepl arvvovcTLas (ace. pi.) (f>p6vi/xo<5 : this corresponds to the 
cro(f)6s in d 4. The particular wisdom here denoted is largely 
covered by Dr. Johnson's (grammatically indefensible) word 
''clubbable." The instinct and tact implied in the English word 
is at all events indispensable for the office in question. 

C 10. The position of the re is not logical : grammatically the 
two main items to be connected are (1) the guardian of what is 
present, and (2) the producer of the hoped-for addition ; whereas 
the position of the re forces us to think of the two items as (1) 
the present, and (2) the /u^ure (augmented) good-fellowship. — There 
is a further structural irregularity in ttAciovos, which does not 
depend on eVi/xeAT^ri^s {one who takes care) alone, as in grammar it 

VOL.1 241 R 



640 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

should, but on a sort of compound noun eTn/JLeXr^Trjs ottw? eo-rat 
which is equivalent to one ivho produces. (Possibly Plato did not 
like the sound of (jivXa^ re rrjsy or perhaps he began with the 
continuation koI rrjs ecro/Aevrys in his mind, and thought, as he 
went on, that it did not express all that he had to say, and so 
chose the fuller phrase, — all that remained of the former being the 
case of TrAei ovos.) 

d 4. vi^ffiovTo. T€ Kal (Tocfiov '. though cro^ov is the equivalent of 
(fipovLfMov TTcpl (Twovcrtas in c 9, vrjcfioVTa (in the literal sense) 
introduces only one, though the most essential, of the conditions 
on which the character of the ddopvfSos of c 6 depends. Cp. 
Aristotle, Pol. 2. 12 (1274 b 11) UXoltiovos 8' . . . (lSlos) 6 7r€pl 
TYjv jji€di]v vofJioSy TO Tovs vrj(f)OVTas (Tvpjroa-Lap\€LV. 

d 6. Kttt is here or. — veos introduces a new condition, in such 
a way as to imply that it would, of course, have been taken for 
granted : " young and inexperienced " is almost the same as 
" inexperienced " alone. (There is something attractive about 
Badham's vkiiiv iov veo?, but, on the whole, I think that, if vkiav 
and veos had equal MS. authority, the latter is preferable. — " If, 
with a drunken or a young inexperienced chief, an assembly of 
drunkards does not signally come to grief, it will be far more by 
luck than good guiding.") 

d 9-e 5. In other words, the critic of o-v/xTroo-ta must be quite 
sure that what he is blaming is not some accidental accompani- 
ment. He cannot be sure of this until he has seen a crv/jLTroa-iov 
properly conducted under favourable conditions. If then he 
condemns it — and he may — we must listen to him (e.g. you 
mustn't select a rotten apple, when you want to condemn apples as 
such — avTO TO Trpayfxa). 

e 4. TToivj ^^ any proceeding" (without sober guidance). 

641 a 3. The next question the Cretan puts is: "supposing 
that we are wrong in blaming crvfiTrocrLa, what good do they do ? " 

a 4. TovTo TO TTcpi ToLs 7rdo"€ts vofxifiov, " this drinking institu- 
tion." I have followed Schanz in reading opOojs for the 
MSS. opOov. Since 639 d 1 we have had 6p6io<s yevofxevoyy opOiJjs 
ycyvofxevqv (twice), ytyvofxevuyv opOoTaTa, and yiyvofievov opOaJs. 
It is more likely that a scribe mistook the termination than that 
Plato should have varied the phrase here. 

a 5. The antecedent to o is o-TpaTevpa, not the statement 
about it. 

a 7. VLKT] TToAe/xov : so above 638 a 7 vcktjv fJ-o-XV^ (^t 647 d 

TT^V €1/ T^ TToXefXO) VLKYjVy at C 4 bcloW TToXkpHiiV VtKttS). 

242 



NOTES TO BOOK I 641b 

b 1. For TraiSaycoycti/ as a variant for apxciVj "lead," St. cps. 
La^vs 897 b, Tim. 89 d (cp. our "ruler and guide"). The word is 
cunningly chosen (and as cunningly repeated in b 3), to lead our 
minds to the great subject of TratScta. — tl fxeya ; i.e. what result 
corresponding to the ov o-fxiKpov dyadov produced by an army ? 

b 3. TL Se ; this is not a repetition of Cleinias's question, which 
would be oTt (cp. Euthyphro 2c, Laws 662b 1), but is "to take 
another point," or "again." — The indirect way in which the Ath. 
suggests that symposia may have a moral, educative action 
heightens the dramatic effect : at the same time it is polite. This 
is the second time he has turned the tables on the two Dorians. 
First he proved that crvcrcrLTta, which they cited as cTTLTrjSevfxaTa 
a/o€T^?, were bad for morals ; and now he is evidently going to 
show how crv/xTToo-ta, which they prided themselves on not having, 
may help to form the perfect character. 

With this transition to the subject of TratSeta at b 6 we pass 
from the Introduction to the main subject of the treatise, with 
which, as has already been hinted once or twice, the consideration 
of the ediicative value of constitutions, customs, and laws must be 
inseparably connected. We see that the proposal to investigate 
Dorian institutions was only a dramatic introduction to the 
consideration of laws and customs from an independent philo- 
sophical stand-point. Cleinias and Megillus, we are to suppose, 
began by thinking that the main purpose of the conversation was 
to investigate their own institutions, but I cannot understand 
how a modern reader should think that Plato, at any period of 
the composition of the Laws, had this in his mind as his main 
object. 

b 4. Kara Tpoirov : see above on 635 d 7. — ^^All the texts, 
apparently, have rj tovto, as if it were a question : surely it should 
be rj TovTo. 

b 5. ovTios : opposed to the oAtus that follows. — " f^P^X^ '''XI -^ ^' 
^pa.\v Tt 0" Burnet. f^po-X^ ''"'■ '''V Bekker. — "Sic sexcenties 
l^pa^v Tt, /Spax^a arra, crp.LKp6v tl et cr/xt/</o' arra usurpatur. 
Ejectum videtur tl ob sequens Trj" Stallb. — What the Ath. says 
here is : " any educational influence, even though it only aft'ects a 
few, deserves respect, as part of a great and important system." 

b 6. oAws : i.e. not about individual cases, but in general. 

C 1. TTpaTTOLiv : intransitive. 

C 2. TraiSeia fxkv odv . . . (XTratScvo-tav : Cleinias had instanced 
viKrj TToXefxov as an important result (/xeya) : the Ath. says it is 
merely one among the advantageous results of TraiSeia, and, far 

243 



641 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

from being so indisputably /xeya, as CI. thinks it, it sometimes 
undoes some of the advantages to which it is incidental — as indeed 
is implied in the proverbial qualification KaS/xeia, which nobody 
ever heard applied to TratSeta. — The argument does not seem quite 
on all fours here, unless we admit an extension of the phrase to 
cover remoter consequences. What was generally called a KaSfxeia 
VIK7) would be less likely to produce v/3pL<s in the victor than one 
which had cost him less. — For KaSfieta Ast quotes from Erasmus's 
Adagia ; " undecunque natum est adagium, Cadmeam victoriam 
appellabant infelicem etiam ipsis victoribus." 

C 8. SoKels >//u.ty, "we are to conclude then!" — Cleinias can 
hardly believe his ears ; still less, doubtless, when he hears the 
Ath.'s confident assent (d 3). — ttjv iv toi? otVot? kolvtjv StarpifSrjV : 
lit. " the occupation of drinking in company," a blunt phrase 
adopted by the Ath. himself at 645 c 3. 

d 1. 0)9 €LS TratSeias fxeydXrjv fxolpav TCLVovcrav (the construc- 
tion — after Aeyeis — is a variety of that noticed on 624 a 7), " has 
an important educational tendency." 

d 6. TO fjL^v aXrjOks : used adverbially, as at Thuc. vi. 33. 2 
Trp6<l>a(TLV pXv Eyeo-Tatwv ^vfifia^ia . . . to Se d\rj6i<i StKcAtas 
k-KiOvp^La. — " To be quite sure that this is so in very truth " 
{^u(T\vpi^eG-6ai here, I think, as at Theaet. 158d, Grat. 440 c, 
means "to maintain," or "insist upon a thing to oneself" and so 
"to feel sure of"). Cp. Tim. 72d to jxcv dX.y]6€S, ws etp-qrai, Oeov 
(rvfXffi'qcravTO'i tot' dv ovtcd p^ovoi^ ^uo-^vpi^oip^Oa. 

6.1. "As we have embarked on the subject," he goes on, "you 
are welcome to my opinion." 

d 10. TTetpMpieda : indicative, I think. 

e 2 f . Before Burnet, all inter2)reters took avvTetvaL as govern- 
ing Toi/ koyov. He, however, puts a comma after, as well as 
before, (rvvTelvai, i.e. he takes it absolutely, "svith ctti, in the sense 
of " do your (and my) best to," and governs tov Xoyov by SrjXiocraL. 
This makes the arrangement of the latter part of the sentence 
seem awkward. But the apparent awkwardness is not foreign to 
the style of the Laivs ; and it was perhaps intended to give special 
emphasis to tov Xoyov. On the other hand it clears up the con- 
struction of the earlier part of the sentence. How obscure this 
was we may see from the fact that, while Ast says we must 
supply in sense cri'VTetvat toi/ vovv with u//as (getting it out of the 
orvvTeLvat toi/ Aoyor), Stallb. explains the " zeugma " by supplying 
dva(f)€p€iv TOV Xoyov Treipiop^cvovs with vp.ds. Plato's usage too is 
more in favour of strive^ as a meaning for (rvvTelvai^ than direct. 

244 



NOTES TO BOOK I 6416 

ireipdifxevov agrees with the subj. of 87/Aa)a-aj,, and, with a/Aws ye 
7r(09, means " to the best of my powers." 

e 5. r)fjLiov : the order here is of the same involved kind noticed 
in the truvTctvai sentence. — v7roX.afxl3dvov(Tiv is used here, as at 
Apol. 28 e (OS eyo) lo-qOr^v re. k(u vireka/Sov, in the sense of helieve^ 
he under the impression. 

e 7. "I think of as many matters as he ; but I give heaven 
thanks, and make no boast of them " (Jaques, in As You Like It). 

642 a>l. CTKOTTO) 8rj fxr] 8o^ai/ v/xiv Tra^acrxw^at, "I am anxious 
not to give you the notion." — In Trcpl a-fxiKpov L has undoubtedly 
here preserved for us the right reading (and so 0*^) : A and 0^ had 
TTcpl crpiKpa. 

a 3. oLvaKadaipofievoSj " developing, expounding " (a long argu- 
ment). In a passage of Porphyrius's Life of Plotinus (quoted by 
Ritter and Preller, p. 517) the word occurs in this sense : P. says 
that Plotinus, and two other pupils of the philosopher Ammonius, 
bound themselves fnjSkv eKKaXvirTetv tcoj/ Ap,jx(oviov Soyyaartuv, d 
8r) €v rats aKpodcea-LV avTols dveKeKaOapro " which he had 
expounded to them in his lectures." Plato probably uses it con- 
sciously as a metaphor — from the extracting the metal from the 
ore {Laws 678 d). Ast takes the word to mean elaborate (a long 
speech), a slightly different view. Stallb. thinks it can mean " to 
make byway of explanation" (a long speech). (Badham rewrites 
it di/cKas alpofxevos !) — to Se, " at vero " Stallb., who cps. Apol. 
23a; see above on 630 d. — rj Kara (fyvcriv . . . (XTroAa^etv, "its 
scientifically correct treatment can never get clear and adequate 
expression in (philosophical) argument without (the help of) a 
correct theory of p.ova-iK'q " ; and this last, he says, cannot be 
discussed without an exposition of what is meant by education in 
general, of which it is a branch. — That SLopOwcrts means " correct 
treatment " we are helped to see by the ev rots koyots that follows. 
— For ovK . . . (ra(f)€s for ovSev (ra<f>€S cp. Rep. 368 a irdvv ydp 
diiov 7r€Tr6v0aT€j Crat. 425 d and Soph. 247 e f^kXriov for ^kXTiov 
Tt. — For (rac^es diroXafieiv ep. Polit. '2,11 c, €oik€v . . . rrjv . . . 
(vdpyeiav ovk arretAr^^evat ttco. 

a 7. opdre . . . Xoyov : the first four words cannot be any sort 
of apodosis to the el clauses that follow. They mean : " Consider 
(both of you) what we had better do." The following construction 
seems rather slovenly, and it is not surprising that Hermann 
(followed by Schanz) wants to delete from et to Xoyov. The 
nearest approach to this is such a construction as the first et clause 
at Xeii. Gyrop. iii. 3. 49 tl 8', e(^r;, w Kvpe, el kol av avyKaXea-as, 

245 



642 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

€(i)S €Ti. 'i^€(TTi^ TrttpaKcAevcrato, ei ayaa ri koX crv a/xeivofs 7roi^O"ats 
Tov<; (jTpaTL(j)ra<s ; Here the ri ; ("how would it be?") has to be 
supplied out of the previous opare tl Trotw/tev. Another ei clause 
depending on something not expressed is that at Laws 744 a ei 
ixoi (rvix/3aLV€L tovto rj kol (XTroTvy )(^dv(D tov (tkottov ; The con- 
versational anacoluthon is best marked by a — . 

b 3. 7rp6^€vo<s apparently used as an adjective here : so ^cvos at 
Soph. O.T. 219 (also c. gen.) dyw ^€Vos /xev tov Xoyov tov8' c^'epw. 

b 4. TracTLv Tols Traicrtv, . . . evSverai eKacrrov tuxmv : the 
peculiarity of the anacoluthon is that there seems to be a tardy 
attempt to mend it ; eyyeyoi^cv, which comes as if after a 
parenthesis, is a sufficient explanation of the dative TraicrtV ; again 
quite conversational. 

b 5. Ast unaccountably takes ravT?^ as adverbial {^^ propterea "). 
Its separation from tjj TroAet gives it special emphasis. Tavrrj rfj 
TToAet depends grammatically on evvoia rather than on Trpo^evnyv, 
though the proximity of Trpo^ei/iou to tyj ttoAcc is significant. It 
shows whose irpo^evoL are being talked of. — Badham rejects -^fxayv 
. . . TToAci as a " miseri magistelli inter pretatio" and Schanz follows 
him. The omission certainly seems to improve the sentence. 

b 8. rdv TTai^ixiv evOvs : the gen. depends on olkoviov ; the 
qualifying evOv'i has very little definite meaning. We might 
say : " If I heard the mere children talking, and they, being 
Lacedaemonians, had some fault to find with, or some praise to 
bestow upon, the Athenians." — In the margin of Cod. Voss. was 
written €k twv iracSiDv €v6v<i : Schanz adopts this, but such a 
phrase would come too soon after c/< vewv evOvs, and the loss of the 
€K, if it was there, is hard to account for. As it is, the preceding 
€K v€0)v €vO\s helps to show that €vOv<i goes with iraiSojv here. — 
The plur, vfioiv applies to the whole body of npo^evoi of Athens, 
of whom Meg. was one — the rjjjiMv tiov tt/do^cvwv of b 6. '4 

c 2. Ace. to Boeckh KaKuJs p^i^iv tlvol is a Laconism. It is 
certainly not ordinary Attic. 

C 5. TToo-av, " thorough, hearty." 

C 7. StacfiepovTios tolovtol : Ritter quotes Ep. vii. 336 d 
(fiofSeLcxdaL Se fx'qSe ' AO'qvas ' ctcrt yap Kal CKel irdvTiav dvOpWTToyv 
StacfiepovTes Trpbs dp€T7]V. 

c 8. The two points about the goodness of the good Athenian 
are : (1) that it is spontaneous {avTO(f>vio<s) ; it is open to him, as . 
it is not open to the Spartan, to be bad in all sorts of ways, if he ' 
likes ; (2) it is genuine, and the mark and warrant of its genuine- 
ness is that it is (as we should say) perfectly natural — the gift of 

246 



NOTES TO BOOK I 642 c 

the divine author of the whole scheme of things — ^€t^ /^o</>^ : at 
Laws 875 c, a natural endowment {(f>v(r€L) is spoken of at the same 
time as a divine gift (6€l(^ fxoLpcfi; at Phaedr. 230a, a "divine 
disposition," ^eta tls kol aTv<f>os fiolpa, is spoken of as the gift of 
nature (<^uo-€t) ; at Apol. 22 c, a poet's "enthusiasm" is spoken of 
as ifiV(T€L, at Ion 534 c it is spoken of as bestowed Oeia fioipa (see 
E. S. Thompson on Meno 89 a). Of course all that is <j>v(tu is not 
Oiic^ fxoip^ — cp. Critias 121a where 17 tov Oeov fxoipa is spoken 
of as disappearing from a man, and being replaced by the purely 
human — to dvOpioTrtvov rjBos — and many gifts of providence are 
adventitious, and not natural, but where the nature is of divine 
origin, it is of the right sort — no sham. — For dXrjOios kol ovtl 
TrAacTTWs St. cps. Soph. 216 c fxr) TrAao-Tws dXk' ovtcos (faXoa-ocfiOL, 
and Rep. 485 d ixr) TrcTrAao-^evws dW dX.r]$ii)<s <j)LX.6arocf)Os. 
(Valckenaer rejected dela jxoLpa . . . TrAacrTws as an explanation 
of avTo<f)vojs ; Cobet rejected dkr]6(j)<5 . . . TrAacrTws ; Schanz 
rejects ^cta fxoip^. — Thompson on Gorg. 506 d takes deia jxolpa 
in this passage closely with avroc^vws.) 

d 2. oTToo-a : so at d. 4. Both men answer in the same strain ; 
they are content to have the present topic thrashed out however 
long it may take. 

d 4. TySe, "here," i.e. at Cnossus. It is best to give rrj^e the 
local sense, as at 630 c 2 and d 5. (Ast takes it as outws, and 
suggests altering it to r]^'q.) If this is right oiKilo^ in d 6 
will not mean, as Bergk thinks, "our fellow - townsman," but 
"a connexion of mine." There is a dramatic propriety in the 
fact that, as Stallb. points out, Cleinias should bear to Epimenides 
the same relationship that Plato himself (i.e. the Ath. stranger) 
did to Solon. 

d 6. It is best, with Grote (vol. iii. p. 88), to acknowledge that 
we have here "a remarkable example of carelessness as to chron- 
ology," but we need not lay it at Plato's door ; nor are we driven 
to convict the Cretan, who makes the statement, of what St. Paul's 
quotation at Titus i. 12 asserts to be the national vice of his 
countrymen. As below at 677 d 8, where the Ath. refers to 
Epimenides as "your friend of quite recent times," tov dTe\v(a% 
X^cs y^vopLivov, and alludes to another wonderful story about him 
— so here Plato (dramatically) ascribes to the Cretan an amusing 
ignorance of Athenian history, as well as a natural disposition to 
make Epimenides play a prominent part in a time of national 
crisis. (Meursius, In Solon, ch. 9 conjectured p/Ta, i.e. 121, for SiKa.) 

e 1. <f>ol3ovp.€V(DV TOV Hepa-LKov 'AOrjvaiiDV (ttoXov : a similar 

247 



642 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

dislocation of what seems the natural order where genitives are 
concerned is not uncommon in the Laws. St. quotes 648 e rr]v 
TrdvTiDV rJTTav (fiof^ov/xevos dvOpijoTTiov tov TrwfjLaTos, 688 b jrpos 
TrpwTrjv TTjv TTJs arv/JLirdcn^s rjykfxova dpeTrjs, 730 a jxeB' ov yap 
LK€T€vaas fxaprvpos 6 iKkr-qs deov <a7r>€TV)(€V 6/xoAoyiwv, 858 c 
TOLS pev riov aAAwv crvyypdpipLacriV ttoit^twv, 873 d ev tois t(ov 
ScoSeKa optoicTi p.€pwv. 

e 4. €^evii)dr](Tav v/xtv, " formed a friendship with you." 

e 5. ol wpoyovoL Yip,Q>v : i.e. our family (at that time), in the 
person of Epimenides. — €k too-ov, "from that day to this," The 
eyiayi that follows shows that Cleinias speaks of his own family, 
and not of the Cnossian state (see on d 4). Ast quotes Diog. Laert. 
i. Ill 'AOif^vaiOL Se TdXavTOv k^prj<^L(TavTO Sovvat avrw . . . o 
Se TO pXv dpyvptov ov TT/oocrrJKaTO, (^iXiav Se koI (Tvp.p.a^iav 
CTTOtr^craTO Kvwcraiwv Kat KOi^va'uDV. 

643 ^ 2* ''"^ ^' ^l^^ ' • ' S^i^cicr^ctt . . . ov irdw paSia, " when 
it comes to being able to do it, my task is none too easy." The 
vagueness of to. e/xa- (probably even more vague than to eyuoi/, for 
which see Heindorf's note on Theaet. 1 6 1 e) allows of its being 
used, by a slight zeugma, in a slightly different sense with p^Sia. 
As the subject of eVoiyu-a it was equal to eyto. — For the connexion 
of the notions of jSovXrja-LS and 8vvapiL<i cp. Gorg. 509 d irorepa 
8vvap,tv i) f3ox)X.r](riV ; ktA. 

a 4. Trpos TOV koyov, " for the purposes of the argument." Cp. 
Phaedr. 257 b tVa . . . aTrAcos tt/jos "E^WTa /xcto. ^tAocrd^tuv Aoywv 
TOV fStov TTOi'qraL. 

a 5. Ti TTOT ko-rlv Kol TLva 8vi/ap,Lv €^(€1 : cp. Laws 892 a 
xpv^TjV . . . yjyuoTjKevai KivSwevovat . . . oioi^ tc ov Tuy^avei 
Kat SvvapLLu y^v f')(€i, and 964 c 2 i)v Svvapav ^^^c KaKta re Kal 
dperrj, Phaedr. 237 c irepl epiOTOs olov re 'ia-ri Kal Tt)v '€\€i 8vvap,iv 
and 265 d el avrolv t>)v 8vvap.LV Te)(^vyj XafSelv 8vvaLT6 ns, ov^ 
d^api. As 8vva(TdaL sometimes means signijicare^ so 8vvap,LS often 
means significatio. (Ast in Lex. gives eight instances.) In these 
three passages, as at Gorg. 455 d — where Cope translates ttjv Trj<s 
p7)TopLK7]s 8vvapLLv dTTadav " the eutire force and meaning of 
rhetoric" — I think the notion in the writer's mind is rather 
" what the term implies^' than " what the thing can do." Ritter in 
a valuable note (p. 1 1 f.) says that in these passages it means 
" what the thir.g is." Referring to Peipers, Ontologia Plat. 250 ff. 
he says that with Plato elvat is nothing but the 8vvap.LS tov 
iroLetv Kal 7rda-)(^eLv. If that is so, we have in all these passages 
a simple tautology. Cp. Soph. 247 e 3. 

248 



NOTES TO BOOK I . 643 a 

a 6. It€ov €ivat Tov . . . X.6yov : ^^ accusativus, in hac structura 
Atticis usitatus, Platoni imprimis frequentatur" Heindorf on 
Phaedr. 272 e. Among other passages he quotes Laws 688 e rov 
y€ vofjiodiTT^v . . . 7r€LpaT€0v rats TroAecrt (j>p6vy](Tt,v . . . efXTroutv. 
a 7. TOV deov : i.e. rhv Atovvo-ov, an ennobling periphrasis for 
oLvos. Cp. 773 d where olvos is spoken of as chastened vtto 
vrj<f)ovTos €T€pov dcov. Thcse words may also contain a reference 
to the part to be taken in education by the god as the inspirer of 
the Dionysiac Choir. 

b 3. kcyoLS av : so below 782 d 9, Farm. 126 a, Phaedr. 227 c. 
b 5. TovTo avTo: antecedent to otlovv (not, as Stallb., to to 
dyadov etVai otlovv). — €K ttolSiov evdvs : see above 642 b 5 €k veiDV 
€vBv<i. 

b 6. €Kao-Tots : neut. (so Ast — not, as St., masc). We should 
understand it better if Plato had written iv l/cao-Tot? tois tov 
irpdyfjuiTos T:po(Ty)Kovcnv. Probably he did not like the sound of 
two consecutive words beginning with irp, and for some reason 
preferred not to say Tot? Trpoa-qKovu-L tov Tr/aay/xaTos. — The masc. 
oi Trpo&7^KovT€<s Is used as a subst. with a possessive gen, depend- 
ing on it at Apol. 34 b ; the neut. irpoa-qKovTa is equally substan- 
tival here. 

b 8. 17 TLva 01K080/X01/ : " TL<i est forte {etwa) qua significatione 
praesertim cum -q conjunctum gaudet. Sic infra 644 a rj Ttva tt/oo? 
Icrxvv, 740 c y) TLves dppives, 838 c i] Ttva? OlSiTroSas, [867 b i] 
TLva<s tus (iKovo-ioi's], 898 e r/ tivos de/009, 933 d yj tlo-lv tTrwSais, 
934 a •^ TMTtv €7rt^v/xiats " Ast. So Rep. 431 a 7 oTav Se vtto 
Tpo<j>rj<s KaKrj<s t] tlvo<s 6/xtAias KpaTi^Sr), Laws 757 d 3 r] kol 
K'/3aT09 Bijpov Ti, 950 d 8. — With regard to this early specialization 
in the education of the craftsmen, if it had been objected to Plato 
that this sort of training would make a man into a tool, he 
would probably have answered that he meant his oLKoSopot and 
yeoipyoL to be tools. Possibly too, if it were urged that you cannot 
tell at the beginning of a child's education what calling he will be 
best fitted for, he would have said that it is for the good of the 
community that crafts should be hereditary. Cp. Bep. 415 a ctTe 
ovv cnryyevcts ovT€S 7ravT€S to fikv Trokv 6/xotovs av v/xtv avTots 
ycvvwTc. 

C 4. For avayKata followed by an act. infin. St. cps. Soph. 242 b, 
Gorg. 449 b ctVi /xtv, w Sw/cpaTcs, cviat twv diroKpicretov dvayKalat 
Sia p.aKpCiv TOt's Aoyoi'S iroulirOai. 

C 5. linriviiv irai^ovTa : this suggests to us a rocking horse, 
or the TTttiSaywyos on all fours with a child astride on his back. 

249 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

It should be remembered, however, that Trat^^tv is a cognate of 
TraiSeta as well as of TraiSia, and that the line between the two 
was not nearly so sharply drawn with the Greeks as it is with us. 
Only the two richest classes at Athens had to serve as cavalry. 
As €(j)y]/3oi they had to learn to ride in earnest, but it was probably 
not this stage that Plato was thinking of here. 

C 6. TTOiovvra, the reading of the MSS., whether due to the 
original author or to a copying scribe, must be a slip for ttouiv, 
due to the attraction of the neighbouring Trat^ovra. In the 
margin of the MS. of Eusebius, who quotes this passage, the cor- 
rection to TTotelv is made, and Boeckh and Ast made it separately. 

C 7. TratSiwr, the reading of Eusebius and Aristides, is now 
generally adopted for the TraiSitiov of the MSS. — iKetcre . . . ol 
d(f)LKoix€vov<i avTovs Set reXos €;(€tv, " towards the pursuits (or 
employments) in which they themselves (will) have to be en- 
gaged when they grow up," i.e. I take the a</>. tcA. e;(eiv to 
be equal to d(f)iK€(rOai rcXo^ €\ovTas. For reAo? in the sense 
of maturity cp. Phaedr. 276 b dyairwrj dv €v dySow fxrjvl ocra 
€(Tir€Lp€ reXo'i Aa/?dvTa, and Laws 834 c, where tol<5 t^Aos exovcri 
is " i.q. TcAetots, adultis" (Ast) ; so at 899 e Tr/aos reAos . . . opdv 
kXd6vTa<i^ Menex. 249 a cTretSav els dv8po<s reAos itocrtv. tcAos 
e^etv is often used in the Laws without ^tov (once, 801 e, with 
fSiov) for " <o die" At Tim. 90d it means to find its fulfilment, 
and this is apparently the sense which Jowett gives it here. He 
translates " (to direct the children's inclinations . . .) to their final 
aim in life." This neglects the emphatic avrovs. — Another pos- 
sibility is that TcAos e'xcti^ here means " to reach perfection " — the 
same as the reAetov ilvai four lines lower down — "to the point 
to which they themselves must come if they are to reach perfection." 
But the meaning wanted is not that the teacher must set the 
highest possible ideal before the child, but that he must direct his 
thoughts, and more particularly his inclinations, to a particular 
employment. — With this explanation too the emphatic avrovs 
seems out of place, whereas it goes admirably with the 
dcfuKOfxevovs if that is taken to be the most significant word in 
the phrase. (F.H.D. suggests that reAos €)(^ecv means "to take up 
their position in the world.") — The main point in this paragraph, 
as the next words clearly show, is, not that children should 
specialize early but, that the first object of education is to make 
children like doing what will be their life-work. 

d 1. Tpocf>rjv is disciplinam, a common Platonic use ; cp. 
Tim. 4:4: b dv jxkv ovv Sr) Kal crvveinXaixfSdvrjTaL tls opdrj 

250 



NOTES TO BOOK I 643 d 

Tpo(fir] TratSevcreoj's. — tov Trat^ovro?: almost the same as tov 
iratBevo/xevov. 

d 2. €is cpiora . . . apcTT^s : I feel less difl&culty in retaining 
the MS. reading in this much discussed passage than in adopting 
any of the proposed alterations of it. rrjs tov Trpay/zaros dperrjs 
must be taken as a genitive defining the scope of reXetoi/, while o, 
like the otlovv with dyaOov at b 4, denotes the thing in which 
perfection is to be shown. The avrov here I do not take to be 
emphatic. The gen. dperyj'S is like the gen. with eTrto-Ti^/xwv and 
e/xTret/oos (of which many exx. occur in P.). dp^rij is cognate in 
meaning to reActo?, and this makes the connexion more natural. 
We may translate : " In which, when he becomes a man, he will 
have to gain as great perfection as the subject admits of " — lit. " to 
be fully equipped with the perfection of the subject." — Of the 
proposed changes the simplest is the second proposed by Ritter, 
i.e. to put the t^s before dp€Tyj<s : in that case dpeTrjs will depend 
on €piOTa and tovtov tov Trpdy/xaTos on dpeTrj<s. The change R. 
prefers is to put a comma after etvat and a koi before ttJs. — 
Schanz brackets Trj<s . . . dpeTrjs. Badham rearranges the words, 
reading ttJs tovtov tov Tr/aay/xaro? dpeTrjs, o . . . reAetov elvai. 
Ast reads ov (uhi) for o, taking it with yevofxevoVf and making tov 
irpdyfjiaTos an objective gen., depending on dpcTrjs (" excellence at 
the subject "), which itself depends on reAetoi/. 

d 4. The MS. authority is strongly in favour of rjfxiv here. 
The change of one for the other is so common that modern editors 
are doubtless right in following L (" ut videtur " Burnet) in 
reading vfXLv. — The preceding oirep elirov refers to b 2. 

d 6. o XkyofXiv elvuL TraiSetai/, " what we mean by TraiSeta." 
In the previous paragraph we have been told the right method of 
education : in this we have its aim. Though there are difficulties 
about the language of particular passages (e.g. d 8 ff.), the meaning 
of the whole is clear. The author distinguishes between a liberal 
education and a technical training. The method (see above) is 
the same for the two, but the object very diff'erent. It is with 
the former only that the lawgiver is concerned. 

d7. 0' is ''or." 

d 8. Tpo(f)d<s, "bringing up" — as above at d 1, and below 
at a 1. — 0)5 with an ace. part, following kcyo/xev is an absolute 
construction like that commented on above at 624 a 7. St. cps. 
Phaedo 109 d. Cp. Eur. Phoen. 1460 f. dvrj^€ 8' 6p6hs Xahs els 

ipiV XoyuDV, rjlX€L<S fl€V (OS VtKWl/Ttt SeO-TTOTVyV €/x6v. . . . 

d 8-e 2. In this difficult passage the MSS. and Eusebius have 

251 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

fid\a 7r€7rai8€v/x€Vix)v (r(f)68pa dvOpioTroyv. Ficinus and Cornarius 
translate as if they had TreiraiSevfjicvov dvdpioirov^ treat (T(j)68pa as 
redundant, and supply rexvrjv with the gen. aAAwv toiovtoju. 
(R. G. Bury would read els <Ta> re, taking KaTr. and vavKX. to be 
genitives.) Ast saw that dXXiov tolovtwv must have a noun to 
depend on, and conjectured that /xaAa was an early mistake for 
TT/aay/xara ; Winckelmann preferred eTrirrjBevfiaTa, referring to 
918 a 1 where we have KaTrrjXeias eTTLT-qSev/xaTa. With this and 
the change to the ace. sing. {TreTraLdevfxevov dvdpiHTrov) Schanz is 
content, and Ritter approves. As a smaller alteration I proposed 
formerly to read arra for /xaAa and to keep the following genitives, 
taking KaTr^yAetas and vavKXyjptas as ace. plur., and translating 
TTCTT. (Tff). dvOp. " in the case of men who have been highly trained." 
But I now prefer with F.H.D. to see the source of error in 
(TcfioSpa. He for this word would read (TO(f)iav, taking KaTr-j^Aetas 
and vavKXrjpcas as objective genitives depending on it. It will be 
noticed that (ro(f)Lav in the same connexion recurs eight lines further 
down. The gen. dvOpihirMv is on all fours with the rjfxiiov in the 
earlier half of the sentence. We might then translate the whole 
passage from vvv yap : " As it is (cp. vvv Se at Phaedr. 244 a) we 
blame or praise the bringing up of individual men, speaking of 
that one among us as an educated man, another as uneducated (and 
we say this) sometimes in the case of those who have Ijeen highly 
trained for hucksterage or for seamanship, or for any other such 
business." 

e 3. ravTa refers to the business trainings spoken of above. 

e 4. There is something attractive in Ritter's suggestion that 
perhaps for TratSetav here we ought to read TraiSayoiyiav. He 
refers to 659 d where we read ws dpa 7rai8eia fxev eaO' rj Trai^mv 
oXky] re KOi dyinyrj tt/oo? rov vtto tov vop.ov Xoyov opdov 
elprjixevov. 

e 6. €7rL(rTdp.€vov is not connected with reAeov by re, but it is 
subordinate to and explanatory of reXeov. For apxetv re /cat 
dp\€(Tdai St. cps. Solon ap. Stob. Serm. xlvi. 22 d.p)(^€ Trpdrov 
fMado)V dp)(€<T6aLy dp^ea-^ai yap fxadiov dp^eiv kincrrrjcreL^ and 
Arist. Pol. 1333 a 2 and Cic. De legg. iii. 2. 

644 a 1. dcfiopLcrafxevos (the technical term for "isolating" a 
phenomenon) refers to the fxr) dopta-rov yh'-qrab in 643 d 6. — For 
0)9 e/xot L^ and 0^ apparently have e^ o)v (cp. Prot 313 c e^ S>v 
(TV Aey€is, Phaedo 61 c e^ 5v eyo) ycrdrjixaL). This looks like a very 
early variant. 

a 3. TLva : cp. above on 643 b 8. — 1 see no force in Badham's 

252 



NOTES TO BOOK I 644 a 

objection that it is ridiculous to talk of tcrx^s as if it were a a-o<^ta. 
To say nothing of the difference between aAAos and the English 
other in such sentences, " the training which aims at money, or, say, 
some particular bodily strength " implies the acquirement of skill, 
and (ro(f)La includes all sorts of skill (cp. Prot. 321 d 'H</)ato-Tov 
Ktti 'A^i;vtts TYjv ei^rexvov <jo<j>tav\ and a man may be, in a 
literal, as well as in a metaphorical sense, a cro<pos TraAato-xT^? 
(Soph. Phil. 431). For the whole passage cp. Epist. 358 c 3 
TO yap fSefSatov koI iriCTTov Kal vyus, tovto €yo> (jirjfXL elvat ttjv 
dkrjdLvrjv cfukocrocfiLav, ra? 8k aAAas re Kal ets aAAa T€iVOva-a^ 
(ro<^tas re Kal SetvoTi^ra? KOfxxJ/oTrjTas oifxaL 7r/30crayo/0€V(ov opduis 
ovofxa^eLV. 

a 4. avev I'ov Kal Slktjs : a negative definition of the aim of 
education ; i.e. it must produce (f>p6vr]crL<s and SiKaboa-vvT]. The 
former was partly implied in the ap\€.iv eiria-Tafxivov, and the 
latter in the ap^ea-dai eTriGrTaixevov above. That (TU}cf>po(rvvr] and 
dvSpeia, the other two of the ^eta dyadd mentioned at 631 c, are 
not specified here we have no right to complain. The Athenian 
selects the two%ost indispensable products of education. That he 
is speaking generally, and not philosophically classifying, is shown 
by his resumption of his whole contention, three lines lower down, 
in the form : " true education has got to make us good" prefaced 
as it is by a deprecation of criticism of his previous terms — {xt^S^v 
ovofxart ^laffiepMfied' avrois (i.e. aAAT^Aots). 

a 6. For ovofxari StacfiepecrOai St. cps. Euthydem. 285 a Kal fxrj 
ovofiaTL 8ia<f)€p€(r6ai. 

a 8. (TxeSoi/ : merely a sort of apology for the general term 
dyaOoi ; i.e. it does not mean that in nearly all cases well educated 
men are good (so Ast and Jowett), but that the nearest approach to 
a general term in the case is the word good : " what you may call 
good J*' 

b 1. iMqSajxov drip^d^eLv : this he says in view of the disparage- 
ment of the a-vfMTToa-La, which he is going to show may be educa- 
tional implements for training men in (riocf>poa-vvr]. — TrpcoTov twv 
KaAAiVrwi/ Tot? dpiiTTOiS dv8pd(Tiv TrapayLyvofxevoVy " the greatest 
blessing man can receive, and the better the man, the greater the 
blessing." The irapa- in the verb shows that he is speaking not 
of what a man has ^vo-et, but of additions to it. 

b 2. k^ipx^rat : the connexion with kiravopdova-Oai shows that 
the word is used for '•'■ goes wrong" — "outsteps bounds" — a rare 
use. Cp. Phil. 13 d 6 Kal 6 Aoyos T^/xtv cKTreo-wv ol\r]<Tirai. — The 
statement that it is every man's duty to do what he can to help 

253 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

education into the right lines is noteworthy.- — L and have 
Travros but A has Travrl, and so Og. 

b 6. Cp. above on 624 a 7. The TraAat refers to 626 e 2 fF.; 
though the precise statement that the man who conquers himself 
is good is not made there, at 627 b 6 f. that statement is made 
about a city. 

b 9. dvaXaf^wfiev, " let us consider again " — the object, most 
likely, being, not tout avro, but the sentence — " what we mean 
by that same" ; so at Apol. 19a dvaXdf3(DfX€V ovv e^ dpxyj'S ris 17 
KaTTjyopta lo-Ttv, and at Hipp. Mai. 288 a dvaXd/^t) 6 Aeyets, Phil. 
33 c fivrj/JLyji^, ws €0lk€1', otl ttot €(ttlv Trporepov dvaXrjTrTeov, 

C 1. poL : this ethic dative turns what looked like a command 
into a request. It is almost " if you please." I don't think Schanz 
can be right in altering it to /xov. Cp. Dem. 18. 178 tovtw Trdvv 
^01 Trpo(T€\€Te Tov vovv. — dTToSe^acrOe kdv ttws 6vvaTos yevw/xat : 
so Rep. 525 d ov8ap.YJ aTroSe^o/xevoy edv Tts . . . StaXeyrjTaL — 
" allow me to . . . if I can " — The 8l €ik6vo<s, of course, goes with 
SrjXcjcrai. — ''Let me, please, try and show you, by the help of a 
figure, how the case stands." 

C 4. 'eKa(TTov avTov : a variety of the common avros tKao-TO? 
{^^pro se quisque" Ast), "each separate individual," or "each 
separate self." — eVa is of course predicate. (St. takes avrov closely 
with €va.) 

C 9. peXXovTiov : Stephanus was for reading peXXovroLVy in 
which case, I suppose, Trpos Se would be adverbial : " nan male " 
Ast says, though he keeps yaeXAdvTwv, supplying avriov (i.e. the 
two (Tvp^lSovXa), -qSoviq and Xvttt]) with it. But certainly, if 
pieXXovTiov be kept — and I think it should — it is best, with 
Stallb., to take it as a neuter. — For the adjective used substantively 
without the article cp. Laws 816 d dvev ydp yeXotcDV rd o-irovSaia 
. . . p^adeiv . . . ov Svvarov. — otv, which refers of course to So^a?, 
was altered in the margin of Eusebius to the un-Attic ah (cp. 
Wecklein, Gurae Epigraphicae^ p. 14). 

C 10. A good instance of the neutral use of cXTrt?. 

d 1. Odppo<s, " confidence," " a cheerful expectation." As he 
has deliberately given the neutral sense to cAttis he has to find 
another word for. it here ; besides, ddppo<s is more decidedly the 
opposite of cfiofSos than cAttis is. Cp. 671c rov emXirLv kol 
OappaXkov. For this use, and for the whole passage, cp. Tim. 
69 cf. aAAo T€ eiSos ev auTOj xjyvxyjs TrpocnoKoSopLovv to dvqTov, 
Seivd KOL (xi^ayKata €V eavTw 7radrjp.aTa €_)(0f, irpioTov pkv rjSovqv, 
p.kyi(TTov KaKov SeAeap, eVeiTa Awas, dyaOoiv <j>vyd<5, eVi 8 av 

254 



NOTES TO BOOK I 644 d 

Qdppos Kttl <|>o^o^, a<|>poke aujjipouXw, dvfxov Se hv(Tirapafxv67)TOv^ 
IXircSa 6' evTrapdyojyov. (cAttis seems here used in the sense of 
fancy.) — €7rt iracn tovtols, "about all these (instances of hopes and 
fears)." 

d 2. XoyuTfios (sc. lo-Tt) : the construction changes here. — 
OS . . . €Tr(i)v6jxa(TTaL is rejected by Schanz. He apparently 
considers it manufactured by a commentator out of 645 a 2. But 
if these words were absent there is nothing to which the following 
remarks of CI. and Meg. could refer. It is a sudden revelation of 
the way the Ath.'s mind is working, and his hearers are not un- 
naturally bewildered. "What follows at 645 a is an explanation. 
He means that what this calculation (about the advisability of 
encouraging hopes or fears) is to the individual man, that, in the 
case of the state, is the debate which results, by public agreement, 
in a law. 

d 7. davixa : cp. 803 c avOpcjTrov Se, oTrep ecTrofxev 'ifXTrpocrOeVy 
diov Tt Traiyvtov efi'at fxe/xrjxavrjfxevov ; and 804 b davfxara 
6vT€<s TO TToXv, (TfJLLKpa 81 dXrjOeias drra ixerkyovT^s. Cp. the 
hymn in Browning's " Pippa Passes": "God's puppets, best and 
worst, are we." 

d 8. Rabe {Rh. Mus. Ixiii. 2, p. 236) says 0^ gives -qy-qcro/xeOa 
as read by rov Trarpidpyov to /SlJSXlov. — twv ^wwv Oclov : the 
MS. text is quite sound here, I think. twv ^wwv is " living 
creatures though we are " ; we are not lifeless — put together (cp. 
(Tvv€(rTr]K6s below) out of wood, but we are puppets, all the 
same. If the apparently simple reading rojv Oecov — suggested 
by Muretus and adopted by Schanz — had stood here, I think 
we should have had avrwv instead of the emphatic IkciVwv in 
the next line : be that as it may, who can say that Plato ought 
to have said Oav/xa deQ>v here rather than 9avpa Oeiov ? — For the 
consciousness that the cognate word implies the noun deol, and 
that the noun can, in the afterpart of the sentence, be referred to 
as so implied, Heindorf on Theaet. 168 a refers to this passage 
and to Laws 864 d Trai8i(^ \pwp.€vos, ovSev ttw twi/ toiovtwi/ (sc. 
7rat8cov) 8ia<^kp€iv. Cp. Porson on Hec. 22, where he quotes Soph. 
Track. 259 ip^crai wokiv Trju ^vpvTetav * rovSe (sc. ^vpvTov) 
yap fieraLTLov Moi^ov f^pord^v €(f>a(TK€ tovS^ ctVat wddovs. — Because, 
in mystical language, in the Timaeus (39eff.) Plato talks of the 
ovpdviov Oedv ycvos (the stars) as ^wa Oda Kal aiSia, many editors 
of this passage have adopted the belief that the true reading should 
be ^eituv, and that twv {"wwv dettov (a strange order) means ^^ gods." 
— €tT€ 0)9 Tratyviov . . . crvvca-TrjKos : another difference from 

255 



644 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

ordinary puppets : it is possible that we are not meant for the 
amusement of the heavenly spectators ; they may have been made 
" for some serious purpose." — We need not follow up the metaphor 
by asking, " who pulls the wires and with what motive ? " The 
following words (roSe 8e la-fxev) confine its application. We answer 
to the tug of passion or other motives just in the way that the 
marionettes answer to the pull of the wires. (Cf. King Lear iv. 
i. 38 " As flies to wanton boys, are we to the Gods : They kill 
us for their sport,") Cp. Pol. 268 a 5 kol tovto fxev eTrLO-KexJ/ofxeOa 
ToSe Se L(rix€v, and below, 672 b 8. 

e 1. yiyvioG-Ko/jiev : the pres. means we are (not) inquiring (into 
this — i.e. the motive of the pulling). 

e 3. dvdeXKovcTLv Eusebius, dvOeXKOva-ai MSS. — '-'■errore aperto^ 
cujus fons in vicino kvavTiai ovcrai cernitur " Stallb. 

e 4. ov 8r] 8i(i)pLcr/x€vr] dperr] koI KaKia Kiirai : lit. " in the 
very region where vice ' marches with ' virtue." We might say, 
"on the border line between vice and virtue." — fxia yap . . . Seiv 
. . . (TvviTr6p.€vov . .- . dvOkXKiiv T. dXX. viv. €KacrTov : still less 
of the original metaphor is left here — nothing but the wires : we 
are no longer a spectacle : we can pull our own wires. — 6 Xoyos : as 
before, the personified argument — ^^ Philosophy.^^ 

645 ^■'■* "^W '^^^ XoyuTfxov dy(oyy]v ^pvcrrjv kol lepdv : Homer's 
picture of Zeus at one end of the golden rope, successfully resisting 
the pull of all the other gods and goddesses at the other, was no 
doubt present to Plato's mind here, — as at Theaet. 153 c, where he 
suggests that the golden rope is an allegorical representation of the 
sun — but I do not think that dyoyyrj is an abstract used for the 
concrete ; i.e. it does not mean rope, but drawing. It is XP^'^V 
that is used in the non-natural, i.e. the metaphorical sense : — " the 
golden and blessed drawing of reason." (Cp. Twelfth Night i. i. 35 
" How will she love, when the rich golden shaft Hath killed the 
flock of all affections else That live in her.") dywy-q will thus 
have here much the same sense it has at 659 d 1^ TratSwv oXkt^ re 
KOL dyisiyi] — and at 819 a, where it almost equals rpocfyi^ or 
TratSeta. By this time the metaphor has almost disappeared : it 
survives only in the suggestion of Homer's golden rope. — rrjs 
iroXecos KOLvov vofxov eTTLKaXovfxevrjv, " which gets the name, 
when it affects (not a man, but) the state, of a generally binding 
law." (See above on 644 d 2.) The main idea which emerges 
here is one which has been presented to us before, and which 
the author means us to have in mind all through ; i.e. that 
of the educational influence of law. Behind all education too, 

256 



NOTES TO BOOK I 645 a 

whether of the man or of the community, we are shown the force 
of reason which guides it. Cp. Kit. and Prell. 523 d. 

a 2. aAAas Se (rKX7]pas . . . 6yu,oia? : an embarrassing wealth 
of thought is here hinted at rather than adequately expressed. A 
revision by the author's hand would doubtless have add^d clearness. 
The codex Ricardianus adds kol /xovoeiSyj after ovcrav, and Ficinus 
translates the words. Schanz marks a lacuna after ovcrav. Even 
with the added words the antitheses are not all clearly expressed. 
The 7rai/To5a7rot9 ei'Secrtv o^ota? has, I would suggest, already in 
the ordinary text the ideas to which it is the antithesis, though 
they are not clearly expressed as such. The drawing of virtue 
is single {jxi^ — in an emphatic position) : along with this, and 
with the epithets ^pvo-r] and le/xx, go naturally those of im- 
mutability and harmony^ and these are further suggested by the 
contrasted dissimilarity of the opposing forces. 

a 5. The aei here reminds us of the 8ia f^iov and the Travrl 
in a somewhat similar exhortation to the good citizen at 644 b 3. 
— In the whole of the present passage down to to, ciAAa ykvq the 
language admits of reference to the struggle between the good 
and the bad elements either in the man or in the state. 

a 6. irp^ov KOL ov f^iatov : cp. -the quotation from Isaiah in 
St. Matthew 12. 19 ovk kpia-et ovSc Kpavydcrei, ovSe oiKovo-ei rts 
€V rats TrAaretats t^v cfxovrjv avrov. KaXa/xov crvvT^Tptfifxevov ov 
Karea^cL Kai Xivov Tvcfyo/xevov ov crfSeacLy ecos av €Kf3dX.rj ei? viko<5 
rrjv KpicTLv. The only point in the metaphor here preserved is 
the gold as contrasted with the other metals — physically, in bulk, 
hardness and roughness their inferior, but in worth and (so to 
speak) moral power, their superior. Cp. the language used at 
Rep. 415 a, and often elsewhere in the Republic, of the golden 
element in the state. — SeurOau vTrrjperijjv avrov tyjv dyiayjv : cp. 
Rep. 441 e ovkovv t(^ fiev XoyicniKiZ ap^etv Trpoa-i^KeL, (Tocfiio ovtl 
Kat €)(^ovTL TYjv VT7€p (XTracTrys T'/Js xl/v^rjs TrpojxrjOciav, tw Se 
dvixo€L8eL vw-qKoo) etvat Kat (Tvp.ixd^ij^ tovtov ; In the state., 
it is the duty of the good citizen to support the law, and 
what Plato in the Republic calls the golden element among the 
citizens. 

a 7. The h occurs in no MS. Eusebius has it, and Ficinus 
has in nobis in his translation. The palaeographical argument 
cuts both ways ; the av is as likely to have been the cause of the 
introduction of an ev, as of its loss, and Ficinus's in nobis may 
have been a translation of rjficv. There is a slight gain of 
definiteness of expression in the iv rjpilv, and I have doubtfully 

VOL. I 257 S 



645 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

left it in the text out of deference to the views of most 
modern editors. 

b 1. Kttt ovro) . . . cr€(ro)iJL€vos av etrj : a hard passage. Ritter 
(p. 13) has a useful note on it, more particularly on the uses of 
IJivOo<s and Xoyos. " Though occasionally interchangeable they 
are generally distinct ; fxvdos persuades, is rhetorical, aims at 
producing a certain mental atmosphere : X6yo<s convinces and lays 
down the law ; the Trpooifjua of the Laws are ixvOoi." But I do 
not find it easy to agree with R. that o ^v6o<i d/oerT)? here 
means ''Hhe recommendation of virtue ^^ \ — as we might say in 
quasi-parliamentary language, " the speech for virtue" I think 
dp€Trj<s is a subjective gen., and that the whole passage means 
" If this help is given, and the golden element prevails, virtue's 
persuasive representation, which likened us to puppets, will not 
fail of its effect (and after all the cord I speak of is a golden one)." 
A Aoyo9 is said a-M^ecrOai {Theaet. 164 a and 167 d) when it is 
still maintained, — when it has not to be abandoned ; a /jlvOos 
(Tio^eraL when it holds its own as a persuasive force. For the 
form of the phrase cp. Rep. 621b 8 koI ovt(ji)s, (5 TXavKOJv, fjLvdo<? 
€(ro)d7] KOi ovK (XTrcoAeTo. (Here, though the lit. meaning is " the 
[jLvdos was preserved to us," I think there underlies the literal 
meaning the suggestion that the fxvOos gained its point : this is 
borne out by the following kol rjfjias av crioa-cLcv, &i/ Trei0wjX€0a 
auTw, which also illustrates the persuasive, instructive character 
of the /xv^og.) Cp. Theaet. 167 d o-w^erat ... 6 Xoyos ovros, 
164 a, Rep. 395 b. St. cps. Phil. 14 a (where see Badham's note). 
— For the order of the ws and the Oav/jbdrcDv St. cps. Soph. 242 c, 
Phil. 18 d, and Polit. 260 c. — Ast and Stallb. take 6 /xvOo<^ dp€Ty]<s 
as " the story about virtue " ; sooner than agree to this Badham 
would (very ingeniously) read dp' en for dp€Trj<i. The difficulty 
of deciding the meaning of the gen. dperrjs is so great, that 
Badham's suggestion is very attractive. 

b 2. This result of the use of an et/cwv was that hoped for 
when it was first promised at 644 c 1 : it gives something of an 
explanation (t/oottov tlvo) of what was meant by saying that 
self-mastery is essential to virtue (cp. 633 d and e) ; it means that, 
the better elements must be victorious over the worse. 

b 3. Kol on ttoXlv KOi l^nxiTrjv ktX. : the next result that 
follows, if the fivOo^; makes its way, is that every man for him- 
self can form a right judgement about the various motives and 
inducements to action of different kinds, and guide his life by it, 
and that a state, when it gets its right judgement either directly 

268 



NOTES TO BOOK I 645 b 

from heaven or from the rightly judging man just spoken of 
(tovtov tov yvovTO's ravra), can make of it a law to guide its 
internal and its foreign policy alike. 

b 6. Eus. inserts ai^rov before tovtov : perhaps we ought to 
read avrov instead of tovtov. 

C 1. 8Lr)p6p<j)ix€vov : a synonym for Snopca-fjievov, as at 963 b. 

C 2. avTov : rather loosely used for the distinction between the 
two things that have just been 'said to have been more clearly 
distinguished from each other. — Lastly, light will be thrown, by 
the realization of the nature of virtue and vice, on the great 
subject of TratSettt, and we may be able to see that the time spent 
at a drinking-party has so important a bearing on this subject 
as to merit the closer consideration which we are invited to 
give to it. 

C 3 flf. With TO Trept ttjs eV rot? otVots SLaTpi/Srjs we must supply 
eo-Tttt fxaXkov KaTa(f)av€<s from the previous sentence. — Confusion 
was caused here in the earlier editions by the wrong attribution 
of <j>av€irj ... to Aeye 87]. Hermann was the first of the moderns 
to restore the various speeches to their right authors, but Stephanus 
had already shown the right way. 

C 7. Trjs ye vvv SLaTpi/Srjs : with a manifest reference to the 
TO TTcpl Trj^ €v T. oi'. 8iaT/ot^>y9 of the last speaker. — oTnrep av 
a^. ytyv., like the oTroo-a o^ot (ficXov of 642 d 2 and the oTroa^a 
/3ovX.€L of 642 d 4, give the Ath. carte hlanche as to length. 

d 1. Acye Srj : before a question, like Kac fxoL Aeye at 646 e 4. — 
The Ath. certainly seems to want to startle his hearers. He has 
taken their breath away once by suggesting that getting drunk is 
a branch of a liberal education, and now we have what sounds 
like a farcical suggestion of making a puppet drunk. 

d 2. oLTrepya^o/jieOa : the pres. is, as St. says, supported by the 
similar tense at 647 c 5 (Steph. wanted to alter it to the fut.). 

d 4. TT/ab? oTi : the regular repeated form of the question Trpos 
Tt; — in other words "I can't answer your question, whyl till I 
get the first question answered." — tovto is the ^av/za, and oAws 
(cp. 641 b 6) goes with the whole question : "What," he asks, "is 
the general result to the dav/jia when it has come into connexion 
with wine?" (tgvto) may, as St. says, be neut., referring to 
/xe^r/, as tovtov at 672 e 5 refers to TraiSevo-ts or yop(.La. — I think 
St. is certainly wrong in supplying epioTU) with tovto oAws — 
"sed hoc in universum quaero") — For the two cases of oStos in 
conjunction cp. 646 d 6 (tovto kv tovto ls). 

d 6. ipo)TO) ya/3, " what my question amounts to is . . ."— n 

259 



645 d "^^^ LAWS OF PLATO 

For the proleptic (rcf)o8poT€pa<s with eTrtretVet St. cps. Prot. 327 c 
oStos av eXXoyijxos 7]v^ijOrj. 

e 5. There is a conversational looseness about the ace. rrjv 
€^LV (as there is in the use of avrov two lines above, when the tl<s 
to which it refers comes after it), and there are several other, more 
regular moulds in which the sentence might have been cast, but 
the meaning is quite clear. The ace. with «i§ ravrov d(fiLKV€L(r9aL 
is of the same kind as the ace. wfth o/jlolos of the thing in which 
the likeness is seen : Soph. Aj. 1153 opy-qv o/xotos, II. v. 778 
WfxaO' 6/jLoioi. There is no need, with Schanz, to suspect a 
corruption of the text. 

646^2. TTovrjpoTaTos : at 644 b 7 the admission was referred 
to that a man who could not rule himself was a bad man ; so 
again here. 

a 4. I.e. by the side of the proverbial (Ar. Nub. 1417) childish- 
ness of the old man, we may now set the childishness of the man 
who is overcome by wine. The comparison adds dignity to the 
state of mind of the latter, but it does not make that state any 
clearer ; the childishness is hardly of the same kind. What is 
common to the two is that both come in later life. 

b 5. The el is the usual el after Oavp^d^o). 

b 6. (XTracrai/ ^avAoTv^ra, " utter degradation," Jowett. 

b 7. xpvx^s Aeyet? : with ^v)(rjs we must supply cfiavXoT-qTa 
from the preceding sentence. 

C 1. eTTi TO TOiovTov I again a conversational looseness of expres- 
sion. It is possible that we ought to put a (;) after dSwapLtaUj 
and supply Set lavrov ep^j^aXXetv from what precedes. 

C 3. avTovs /3a8fc{bvTas : the avrovs implies that nobody forces 
them to it (referring to the e/cwv above) ; ySaS. that at the time 
of seeking the doctor's services they are in fair health. — eiri with 
dat., "with a view <o " ; so Prot. 312 b tovto)v yap crv eKacrrrjv 
(sc. p,d9r](rLv) ovk eTrl T€;>(vr/ epaOes, o)S 8r]p-iOvpyo<i e(r6p.evo<^^ aAA' 
eTTi TratSeta, ws tov ISlcottjv Kal rov eXevOepov Trpeirei. — There is 
more in this analogy of medical treatment than at first appears. 
When we come to the Athenian's complete scheme for the regula- 
tion of the use of wine (see 674 a, b, c) we see that its use is to be, 
morally speaking, a medical one ; no city would need, he says, 
many vineyards ; the scheme would not be good for what in 
England is called "the trade." 

C 4. /xer' 6Xi,yov vcrrepov : apparently an adaptation of the 
poetical pLedvarepov ; the usual Platonic phrase is oXiyov (or 
oAtyc^) varepov. 

260 



NOTES TO BOOK I 646 c 

C 7. yv/jLvda-ta koI ttovovs : a liendiadys, " the labours of the 
gymnasia." — dcr^evets probably refers to the temporary fatigue 
after great exertion. 

d 2. row ciAAwv iTTLT-qSevfJidTiDV irkpi : about other practices, 
that is, besides those which are concerned with the body, we should 
expect people to be able to submit to a temi)orary loss or incon- 
venience, if it was the price of greater future gain, 

d 5. I think we have here again a conversational laxity of 
expression, and that the presence of irept with tov oIvov is made 
to cover the absence of irepi or irepc with Siarpif^qs. If we cancel 
(oo-avT(o9 8Lavo7]Teov (with Hermann) or Stavoyjreov (with Schanz) 
and supply 8iavo€i(T6at xpy ^^^ '^^p'^ from the preceding sentence, 
it will be awkward if we do not make this sentence too a question, 
and that will not suit the eiirep clause which follows. 

d 6. 6t7re/o eVt . . . SiavorjdTJvai, " if it is possible to reckon 
this (practice) as really belonging to these (practices) " — i.e. as 
being one of the practices in which a temporary loss will produce 
a future gain. (I think that is better than, with Stallb.j to take 
TovTo to be "this state of things" and tovtocs to be ^^istis quae ad 
compotationem pertinent,'' i.e. 1) irepl tov olvov StaTpL/ST].) — The 
following sentence incidentally explains more clearly what he 
means by tovto ev to vro 19. 

d 8. €\ov(Ta cfiatvt^TaL : the subject to be supplied is 17 tt. t. ot 
SiaTpi/Srj. 

d 9. Trj<; irepl to arto/xa, " than that which accrues to the body " 
(in the instances, i.e., given at c 3 ff.). — rrj ye dpxo '■ i^ ^^^^ 
a metaphor from the stadium — "at the start"? (cp. 648 e 1). 
Ast takes rfj dpxfj to be equivalent to dpx''jv or rrjv dpxi^v, 
omnino. Anyhow the point is that, whereas the ox^cXia spoken of 
just above has to be waited for, this advantage is enjoyed at once. 

e 2. ToiouTov : this does not refer to the word dXyrjSovoiv but 
to the possession of an advantage fx-qSev Trjs irepl rh crcopa iXdmo.' 
— avTO) refers to SLaTpt/Siq ; cp. on 645 d 4. 

e 4. Kat fjLOi Aeye : cp, 645 d 1. — 8vo ^of^uiv eiSr] : just as above 
the Ath. introduced temperance under the guise of a kind of 
courage, so here he introduces the sense of shame as a kind oi fear. 

ell. irpdrrovTes y) AeyovTcs : subordinate to So^d^ea-Oai — "i/ 
we do or say." 

647 ^ 4. eVavTios : here and in the following line not used as at 
a 10 and 646 e 4. There it means opposite in a logical sense ; here 
it means opponent in a military sense. We may, I think, translate 
ivavTLos €o-Tt by "is a foe to," or perhaps "challenges." 

261 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

a 5. a.\y7]S6(TLv KOI TOLs aAAois (f)6f3oiSj "pains, and tlie other 
things men fear " ; so at 635 b we have Avvrac and (fyofSoi, with 
t)8ovat and TratStat next door to them. 

a 8. Ast was no doubt right in altering the ovk av of the MSS. 
to ov Koi. (So too Badham : Ast's other alterations in this 
paragraph — cre^erat kuXwv or (refSei kol KaXet . . . to<S€> — are 
unnecessary.) — kol voixoBerr^s koi Tras ov koI cr/uLLKpov o<^eA.os : 
KOL . . . Kat here is rather "whether . . . or" than "both . . . 
and," and the whole is equivalent to : " anybody who is worth 
anything, whether he be lawgiver or not." 

a 9 f. KaX(jov is subordinated to Trpocrayopemi in order to bring 
out the linguistic connexion between the honourable alSm and 
its execrable opposite. (Schanz rejects the words KaAwv atSto, but 
cp. 699 c 4 ^]v atSw ttoXXolkls €v rots avoj Aoyots etVo/xet'.) — Every 
<fi6f3o<i has naturally an opposite Odppo<s (see above 644 c 10 f.). — It 
is interesting to note that, before it was known that A confirmed 
the reading Tovrit), Heindorf so corrected the vulgate tovt(dv. The 
correct reading also occurred in the margin of 0. 

b 1. fjieyKTTOv KaKov iSia re Kal Srjfiocna, "a curse, whether to 
the individual man or to the state." In saying SrjjxocrLa he is 
probably thinking, not so much of a state's action towards other 
states, as of the character of its laws and institutions. So at 
Phaedr. 277 d Sry/xoo-t'a is explained as e.g. implying vofxovs tlO€ls. 
The adverb would also apply to the action of an individual man in 
a public capacity, as a SiKaa-rrjs for instance, or a speaker before a 
SiKacrTijpiov ; cp. Theaet. 174 be kol SrjfJLOcrli^ . . . orav kv SiKa- 
(rT7)piM r| TTOV aAAo^t dvayKacrOfj Trepl twv irapd TroSas koi t(^v 
ev ofpdaXfjLol^ SiaXeyecrOai. If this latter sense was prominent in 
this passage, it would mean " a curse to either an tStwrry? or a 
TToA-triKos"; probably the words would cover both meanings, and 
so be untranslatable in English. 

b 4. €v 7rpo<s €v recurs at 738 e, 705 b dvO' evos ev, and 
Epinomis 976 e jxla yap (os etVeiv Trpos /xtav : the phrase cor- 
responds to our " man for man " (cp. Kipling's " Man for man, 
the Fuzzy licked us 'oiler "), and " one thing with another." 

b 7. Probably Odppos would not have had a gen. depending on 
it of the thing of which fear is not felt, if it had not been for the 
contrasted words <^o^os (^t'Awv. — alar^vvrjs irepi KaKrjs : " addit 
KaKTJSj quia de pudore dictum est antea, qui etiam honestus potest 
esse " Stallb. — The rrepL with gen. explains what it is in friends we are 
afraid of — i.e. their pouring shame upon us ; cp. 648 b 2 dv8p€ta<s 
T£ Trepi Kal SeiXias of the matter with which the test is concerned. 

262 



NOTES TO BOOK I 647 c 

C 3. a(f)Opov . . . (fj6/3u)v ttoXXmv tlvwv^ " free from all sorts of 
fear." Zeller was apparently the first to put a comma after tlviov : 
previous commentators had made (fiofSiov ir. r. depend on </)o^ov. 
Besides being an extraordinary expression, this last arrangement of 
the words did not give a satisfactory sense, and this it was that 
led to emendation ; e.g. Ast's 06pv/3ov for <f)6f^ov (relinquished 
later), and Heindorfs (fyoPepoiv for (f>6f3o}v. Other arrangements 
of the words as they stand in the MSS. are Stallb.'s, who puts a 
comma after (^opiav ; Vermehren's, who puts a comma after 
TToAAwi/ ; while Schanz rejects <ji6f3(ov. I have followed Burnet in 
accepting Zeller's punctuation. 

C 4. fj-era vofiov : this difficult expression must be interpreted 
in view of the fiera Sikt^s in c 7, and also of the /xera koyov ktA. 
in d 6. I think it means " with the help of the law" : — not only 
that the laws ordain the discipline in coui'age, but that the spirit 
of the laws helps and directs the process of discipline. It is, i.e., a 
state institution. So in the corresponding sentence that follows, 
to preserve the parallelism, instead of saying duly, or rightly 
(feai'ful),'he says ^^ under the inspiration of justice" or "a correct 
judgement^ I have followed Schanz and Burnet in putting a 
comma after vofxov, to show that it goes, not (as Ast) with the 
succeeding, but with the previous words ; otherwise, as ayovre? goes 
closely with aTrepya^o/xe^a, it is hardly in place. 

c 7-d 7. This paragraph should be carefully compared with 
634 a 6-b 6. There, after the " dichotomy " of dvSpeta into (1) the 
power of resisting fear and pain, and (2) the power of resisting the 
seductions of pleasure, the necessity was insisted on of a training in 
both kinds of courage. Here it is fear that has been " dichotomized " 
into (1) fear of pain, and (2) fear of disgrace ; and here too the 
necessity of a double kind of training is insisted on. Only this 
time the training has not, as before, to encourage both sorts ; the 
first kind of fear has to be discouraged, and the second to be 
encouraged. As we read on the present paragraph it is as if we 
were looking at a dissolving view : gradually the familiar figures 
of dv8pe ta and cnoffipocrvvr] emerge, and we see that we have 
been investigating the same question all the time. (Incidentally 
we may notice that the dramatic machinery which (at 634) gave to 
the question the form of a suggestion tliat we should look for some 
such training in the laws of the Cretans and Spartans, has now 
been dropped. I altogether disagree with those critics who see in 
this a change of subject of the dialogue.) 

C 8 f . Trpocryvfxvd^ovTas, " training him to meet " [dvaL(rxvvTia 

263 



647 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

in combat). The wpo- of the Tr/yoyv/xi/a^ovra? proposed by 
Stephanus would be in place only if followed by " we must make 
him able to conquer"; but what we -have is viKoiv Set iroLetv 
Siajxa-x^o/xevov — " make him fight successfully against (his tempta- 
tion to" indulgence)." — For Troielv with an inf. in the sense of compel 
cp. Rep. 407 c KajjiveLV yap oiecrOai Troiel aet KaX wSivovra fxrJTroTe 
Xi'iynv irepl tov (rdj/xaros. 

c 9. avTov MSS. ; Ast corrected this to avrov. Schanz retains 
the MS. reading. 

c 10. E.abe {ut supra) says gives a variant y, for r). 

c 10 — d 7. " Or are we to imagine that though a successful 
fight against timidity is the necessary preliminary to perfect 
courage, and though the most gifted nature (oo-rto-ovv) will never 
reach half the excellence of which it is capable if it has not had 
experience and training in such fights ; temperance forsooth can 
be acquired in perfection by a man who has never gone through 
a successful struggle against a host of delightful seductions that 
beckon him towards, impudence and crime — a struggle in which he 
is to be helped by reason, by active exertion, and by skill, whether 
at play or at work ? Surely he is not to lack all such experiences 
as these 1 " 

C 10. SetX-La : this word, followed by avSpeiaVj and the 
(Toxppwv in d 3 reveal to us that w^e are really discussing the 
^TrLTr^SevfJiaTa for the production of avSpcta and (T(D<f)po(Tvvr] (cp. 
632 e 1 f.). — A had apparently altered ^eiAt^ to SiaiTYj ; but in 
the margin is yp. SetAia : in O the text has SiaLrr) and the margin 
the correction SeiXia {oltt' 6pO(x)(r€io<i' ovk ev) : Steinhart's suggested 
avaiSeict does not fit the passage at all. 

d 6. epyov is difficult ; I think it means the active exertion of 
his trainers, but it is conceivable that it means the habit which 
comes of repeated action on the part of the trained. 

d 8. TOV y' euKora Xoyov : for the article cp. 649 c 7 to y ovv 
eLKos, and 630 d 9 to t€ d\r)0€<i Kal to StKatov, where Ast has 
collected a number of similar instances of the use of the neuter 
art. from later books of the Laws. 

el. (f>6/3ov cfidpfxaKov, "a drug to produce fear." (See Dindorf 
on Steph. Thes. s.v. (f)dpfxaKov.) Gomperz, G. D. p. 600, suggests 
bromine. — deos : in order to make the fictitious parallel as exact as 
possible, Plato postulates a divine origin answering to that of 
wine : the object of the fiction is to bring out clearly the main 
points in the nature and action of wine ; hence the exactness of 
the parallel. One important fact that comes out clearly is that 

264 



NOTES TO BOOK I 6476 

there are different stages of /xWrj (jxaXXov . . . Kad' cKao-TT/v 

TTOO-tv). 

e 2. " €$ekrj L O et in marg. yp. a^ : e'Ar; A " Burnet. — oxttc 
with vofxt^eiv is a somewhat loose (but still more convenient) 
variant of the more regular tolovtov . . . olos av TroLotr] vofii^€iv. 
— Notice also the change from plur. in dvdpioTrots to sing, in 
avToif in e 3. 

e 4. fieWovTa could hardly have taken a dat. (aiircf)) if it had 
not been joined with Trapovra. 

648 a 2. kKKOijxridkvTa : possibly the word is a new creation: 
it implies a previous state in which many, if not all, of the mental 
powers were in abeyance. Kot/xaw is used in a metaphorical sense 
bX Rep. 571 de to Xoyio-riKov pXv eyeipa^s ... to kiriSvixr^riKov 
8e /x?^T€ evSet^ Sovs /^^^tc 7rAr^(r/xovr/ ottws av KOL/x-qdr]. 

a 6. ccr^' oTt ktA. : not "could the lawgiver have made any use 
of it ? " but " could the lawgiver have used it at all (for producing 
courage) ? " We may notice the parallel form of the two 
questions : — eaO' oa-ns at 647 e 1 and ecr^' otl here. 

a 7 f . oroi' . . . StaXeyecrdaij " for instance, what easier than to 
have put this question to him ? " 

a 9. TT/awTov fx€v : this implies that it is not only as a test 
that the drug may be useful — the state to which it reduces a man 
will serve for his training in courage as well. Cp. 649 d 8 
TrpwTov iJL€v vrpos TO Xajjif^dvetv Treipav, elra ets to ixeXerdv. (This 
is better than to take tl 8e ; in b 4 as if it were equivalent to 
€7r€tTa 8L) 

b 1. For fSdcravov Xapuf^dv^Lv cp. Tim. 68 d et Se Tts totjtojv 
e^yw cTKOTrovfievo'S fSdaavov XafxfSdvot . . . 

b 2. For irkpL cp. above on 647 b 7. 

b 6. Kttt TovTo : he begins as if he were going to say : " He 
will say yes to that too " ; then he remembers that in this question 
there were two alternatives, and puts in fxcTa rrjs ao-^aAeta? as 
explanatory of the tovto, slightly varying the phrase by the 
insertion of the article (" the safety you speak of "). (Is it possible 
that a TO has fallen out after the tovto ? It would thus be more 
regular in form as an explanatory addition to the tovto.) 

b 8. XP<^o 8' dv ; (sc. tw <f>apixdKio) : these words introduce the 
second purpose of the drug : in the course of the testing process 
(ets Tous cfyojSovs dyojv Kol €Aey;((ov €. t. tt.) help would be given 
towards the formation of a courageous habit of mind. 

b 9. €v Tois Tradyj/jLacTLVy " while the patient's mind was 
disturbed." 

265 



648 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 1. Toy Se oLTLfxa^Mv : Stallb. says that if the tov jxev had 
been put in, it would have come before TrapaKeXevo/xevos ; I 
think it would have come before rt/xtov : the TrapaKeXevofxevos, 
like the Tifxiovj describes the treatment of a hopeful case, the 
vov6eT(Jjv and the art/xa^'wv that of an unhopeful one ; the 
following fx€v and Se clauses mark the same distinction between 
the two cases. 
• C 3. yv/xva(rdp.evov : the middle (instead of the passive) to show 

that the " patient " is supposed to take an active part in his own 
training. 

C 4. ^rjixtav eTTLTiOeis : subordinate to aTraAXarTots av. The 
only reason for calling attention to this is that Stallb. calls 
eTrLTiOeLS an anacoluthon, and mentions the suggestion to emend 
it to eTTLTiOetrjs, as if it in its clause held the same position as 
ttTraAAaTTois av in the previous one. 

C 5. fxrjSev aXXo kyKaXQ)v tw Trw/zart, "although on further 
consideration (aAAo) you found no fault with the drink." 

C 7. ra vvv, " our present arrangements." — It is not necessary 
with Ast to suppose yv/xvdcrLa supplied in thought from the 
I^revious yvfxvaa-ia of kindred meaning. — Oavfxao-Trj paa-rtov-qs : 
the gen. is the same as that used with verbs of wondering (or 
other emotions) to denote the source of the emotion. Eep. 426 d 
Tt S' av Toy's e^cAovras OepaTreveiv rots TOiaiJTas TroAets Kal 
TrpoOvpLOVfJievovs j' ovk dyacraL Trjs dvSpetas t€ Kal ev^eyoeias; — 
KaO' oTToaovs : the practical schoolmaster would object that the 
numbers in a " drinking " class should be strictly limited. 

d 1 ff. The main outline of this long and complicated sentence 
seems to be this : etVe rts /xovos yv/xvd^oLTo opOciJs: av n Trpdrrot, 
etVe TLS iJL7]8ev okvol jxerd (rvfXTTOTiov TrActovojv eTriSeiKWcrdai ktX. 
(6pOoi<^ av Tt irpdrTOi). 

d 1. TO ttJs ai(T\vvri<i eTTcTrpocrOiv TroLOVfxevos : eTriTrpocrdev 
€LvaL (or yiyvecrOai) means to intervene^ often with the notion of 
obstructing the view (see k-n-tirpoa-diqa-ts of eclipses) : kir. iroLiicrOaL 
is to interpose, generally with the same added notion ; so that 
it means, as here, to screen, lit. "putting his feelings of shame in 
between himself and other people." Cp. 732 b 4 fi-qSc/JLLav ala-\vvriv 
TrpocrOev 7roLox)fxevov. The following clause {rjyovixevos is subordinate 
to 7roLovjji€vo<i) at once gives the reason of the action, and explains 
the metaphor of the previous phrase : his shame is not an actual 
obstacle, but it acts like one ; it prevents others from seeing what 
is going on. So Ast. (For other views see Wyttenbach's note on 
Plutarch, Cons, ad Ap. 36. Thompson on Gorg. 523 d thinks 

266 



NOTES TO BOOK I 648 d 

« 

that there and here iTriTrpocrOev has a slightly wider meaning : 

he says it has nearly the force of e/xTroSiov.) 

d 2. Trplv €v crx^^Vj "until he attains to perfection," or, meta- 
phorically, "before he has got his lesson." 

d 3 f. TTW/xa /xovov dvTt jxvpL(i)v IT pay jxaTiav 7rapa(TK€va^o/xevo<; : 
it is difficult to be sure, but I think that this clause is subordinate, 
not to yvpLvd^oiro but, to opBios av n Trpdrroi, i.e. neither the 
solitary practiser nor the member of the (rvp^Trocnov " would be 
far wrong" (rt, "in a measure," which Badham discards, is 
due to fMeiiiHTL'S) cp. ovSeh irdw rt, Phaedo 57a), "if he avoided 
endless trouble by providing himself with the drug." I have 
therefore taken away the comma which generally stands after 
7rapacrK€va^6ix€vos. — has opOov corrected by a later hand to 
6p6Q)s. 

d 5. cavTw is better taken with ttio-tcvwi/ than with 
7rap€(TK€voL(rOaLj which last is epexegetic of TTLa-revcov. 

d 7. eTTLSecKwcrdaL is, I think, here used absolutely, as at 
Gorg. 447 b, in the sense of kiri^e.L^tv TTOLeccrOai. In that case 
SvvafXLv is only governed by virepOewv and Kparcov, which are 
subordinate to kir i^€lkvv(t 6 ai. — T17 tov iriiifxaro's dvayKaia Stacfiopa 
(difficult), "the inevitable change wrought by the potion," the gen. 
being subjective as at e 5, rrjv rJTTav tov nioixaros. The conjecture 
8ta<f>dop^ first appeared in the Louvain ed. of 1531 (not "in the 
1st Basle ed."), and was adopted by Bekker ; " degeneration " would 
fit the passage well enough ; the dXXoLovcrdaL however, which is 
coupled with the (T^dXX.e(Tdai at e 2, is in favour of the MS. 
reading. On the other hand the meaning ^'change" is strange 
for 8ia(fiopd. (Schanz adopts Hercher's 4*op^, which is palaeo- 
graphically possible, and also gives a fair sense: "the power 
residing in the irresistible course of the potion " — or would (fiopd 
be impulse, force ? — anyhow there is some tautology involved in 
this reading.) 

e 1. vTrepOeiov : a metaphor from the stadium (cp. 646 d 9). — 
<iio-T€ : another "pregnant" locrTe (cp. 647 e 2) — "with the 
result that." 

e 2. 8l a/aerryv, " virtutis heneficio s. ope" Ast. (Schanz again 
sees dittography here, and suggests that Sl should be removed ; 
but then dpir-qv would want a rr^v before it.) 

e 3. TYjv Icrxdrrfv Ttocnv : i.e. that cup after which it would be 
physically impossible for the drinker to proceed. 

e 4. The double genitives are different to those commented on 
by Heindorf on Grat. 400 d, in that here the first is objective and 

267. 



648 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the second subjective ; but they are well illustrated by Stallb.'s 
comparison of Rejp. 329 b ras twv otKetwv 7rpo7rrj\aKi(r€i's tov 
yrjpu)'^. 

e 6. I have followed Schanz and Burnet in adopting Stallb.'s 
insertion of av after yap, though I think it worth considering 
whether y' av was not what Plato wrote ; the loss of the av is hard 
to explain, but y' av might without difficulty have become yap : 
ye very often follows within a few words of vat, — Another 
alteration of the text which is worth considering is that made in 
the Aldine ed., which reads orw^/aoi/et. — Kal 6 tolovtos : even the 
man who is confident in his powers of resistance to temptation 
(would be wise to stop before the last glass). 

649 a 2. (Tx^Sov, as at 644 a 8, modifies the general assertion — 
not that the speaker doubts the truth of what he says, but he 
prefers the more modest form of assertion. 

a 4. Tovs yap yorjTas ovk ev doivrj Aeyo) : i.e. " quacks, who 
do profess to concoct such potions, are not fit to sit down with 
philosophers." F6r Plato's metaphorical use of the word Ooivr) 
cp. (among others) that at Symp. 174 c- (^avAo? wv eirl aocfiov 
dvSpbs tevat Ootvrjv ctKAr^TO?. 

a 5. I have ventured to insert a Kal before a p^rj xprj. (An 
abbreviation of the same shape as that used for (09, when written 
vertically and accented, was used for Kal : this may account for 
the dropping out of Kal after -ws.) It seems Yerj strange that 
Plato should confine excessive and inopportune confidence to things 
a p-q XPI Oappelv — things about which confidence ought not 
to be felt at all. If we have the Kai we get three distinct 
classes of improper confidence : (1) excessive, (2) inopportune, 
and (3) (totally) misplaced. (Schanz puts a comma before a 
pr] XPVi ^^ i^ -^^ took it for a ov XPV — " ^^'liich things ought not 
to be done.") — As the word 7rw/xa goes closely with the gens. 
d(fi. and tov A. dappeiv, no rt (as Heind. suggested) is needed 
before it. 

a 6. 17 TTws Xeyopev ; so at 639 bl t] ttws av Xkyoipev ; where 
an affirmative answer is evidently expected. O says that irarp. /Sl^X.. 
has Xeyiopev and so Ed. Lov. 

a 7. TOV olvov (f)pd^(Dv, "and he will name wine." I 

a 8. TovTo : (nom.) either neut. for masc, referring to olvos 
(cp. Heind. on Gorg. 460 e, where he cites Gorg. 463 b and Laws 
937 d Kal 8r) Kal Slkt] iv dvOpcoiroLS ttws ov KaAov, 6 Travra 
rjp€p(DK€ TO, dvOpioTTLva), OT, better, with ircopa understood. (" Is 
this just the opposite of the last potion we spoke of ? ") 

268 



NOTES TO BOOK I 649 a 

a 9. A has TovOpiairov corr. by A- to tov avOpwirov (cp. 653 d 1) ; 
0^ mentions a reading iriovra avOpioirov. 

b 1. With the somewhat otiose addition r) irporepov (after 
avTov avTov), and indeed with the whole passage, Stallb. well com- 
pares Prot 350 a ol eTricrrT^/xoves twv fxr] eTricrra/y-ei/wi/ OappaXedj- 
TepoL eloTL, Kol avTol eavTOJV, tTretSav p,ddoxri,v, i] irplv fxaOeiv. His 
collection of passages on the effect of wine is also interesting. — (r) 
was omitted at first in A and added above the line ; Schanz discards 
both it and Trporepov.) 

b 2. With irX-qpovcrdaL we must supply Troiet. (H. Steph. 
would have altered it to TrX-qpovTai, so as to bring it into line 
with jjL€crT0VTai.) 

b 3. et9 So^ai/, "in imagination " ; so Philebus 57 c ets cra^ryi/etai/, 
Symp. 196 c ets y' avSpelav "Eyowrc ov8' "Aprjs av^tcTTaTat, Tim. 
46 e et5 w^eAetav " in the way of advantage." 

b 4. (OS aroffios cjv : cp. Crat. 406 c otVos 8\ on o'Uddai vovv 
c^eiv TTotet Ttov Triuovnov tovs ttoAAovs ov;( €>(0VTas . . ., on which 
passage Heindorf has a note on 8c following re, as it does here at 
b 5 (cp. 628 a 1). 

C 2. a TTJs atSovs cAeycs, w? olop^eOa, "what you called shame's 
part, I suppose ? " 

c 3. KttAws fj.v)]ixov€V€T€ i it is simpler to take this (as Ast in 
Lex.) to mean " your memory is correct," than with Jowett " thank 
you for reminding me." To remind is generally dvaixtuvijcrKU). 
At 646 b 1 /jivr]fxovev€is means little more than Aeyets. 

C 4. €v Tois (f>6f^oL<s : the test and discipline of courage are real 
fears and real hardships. The fictitious potion would have pro- 
duced imaginary fears and hardships. The description of its effects 
has made admirably clear the way in which it is suggested that wine 
should be used, and for what purpose. 

C 5. The dpa of the MSS. is altered by a very late hand in A 
to dpa. This correction is manifestly better than Ast's introduction 
of €1 after dpa. — to Ivavrtov : i.e. the right sort of fear (that of 
disgrace) : iv tols evavTiots : i.e. in a state of over-confidence and 
exhilaration. 

c 7. For the to cp. 647 d 8. 

C 8 f . €V TOVTOL<S ... a Tra66vT€<S . . . 7r€<f)VKaiJ,€V . . . 

elvuL, " in such states of mind as would naturally incline us 
to be . . . " 

d 1 f . alcrxpov goes with tl as well as with oTtovv, which is 
added as a sort of after-thought, to make the Tt, when it got to be 
used with Spav, more general Tt was omitted in the old editions 

269 



649 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

and by the first hand in 0, but occurs in A and L, and was added 
by 02. 

d 4. ovKovv ktA., " are not all these (that I am going to mention) 
states (of mind, or condition) in which we are so affected ? " 

d 5. SetAta, as Ast says, is quite out of place in this enumeration. 
Is it possible that dSecXia is what Plato wrote ? (Steinhart's 
suggestion avatSeta is palaeographically likely, but the word is 
descriptive of the whole state, not of a separate manifestation of it, 
as all the other words are.) 

d 7. evTeX.7] T€ Kot dcTLvecrTepav (which agree with irelpav) are 
put in this strange order to emphasize the importance of the point 
that the training he offers to temperance has none of the /xvpta 
TrpdyfjLaTa and the dangers of the only practical training that 
courage can have. — tovt(i)v depends on Trelpav. 

d 9. fSaordvov kol 7rat8ias : a hendiadys ; " sportive test." Cp. 
Polit. 308 d r^ ttoAitikt^ . . . TratSta irpCiTov fiacraviel. — For the 
pleonastic TrXrjv after pidXXov c/xpLeTpov cp. Minos 318 e 7 ov 
yap ecrd' otl tovtov da-efSecTTepov ecmv ov8' on xpr) pidWov 
evXafSelcrdai TrXrjv els deovs Kal Adyw Kal epyu) e^apLaprdveiv ; it is 
very like the 7rXy]v after aAAo at Tim. 30 a. 

el. €p,p.€Tpov p.dXXov, "less objectionable." — dv Kal ottwo-tiouv 
ft-er €vXa/3€ia<i ytyvr/rat, "provided a little care attend its 
application." 

e 3. lovra agrees with the imagined subject of Aa/x^aveiv. — 
" Do you recommend a man (instead of using the test I offer) to 
run the risk of making a compact or legal agreement with him ? " 
(If he breaks it you will know that he is not a just man, but is not 
the experiment a dangerous one?) 

650 a 1- avTO)v refers to ra crv/x/JoAata (so Ast. — Bekker 
prefers to read ai^rw. Stallb. understands by ai'Twv the things 
themselves about which the agreement was made). — a-vyyevo- 
pL€vov /xera rrjs rov Atovixrov ^eco/ota?, " by watching him (lit. 
getting into his company) with the help of a Bacchic festal in- 
dulgence ? " 

a 2 ff . 17 Trpos ktX. : a good deal has to be supplied from the 
previous description of the parallel case, but the meaning is quite 
clear, if the parallel be kept in mind. I have followed Stallb. and 
Schanz in adopting Bekker's correction of the MS. KLvSwevcravres 
to KLvSvvevcravTa, and adopted Burnet's punctuation, with a comma 
before and after ovtids, which resumes (cp. 625 b 6). — Ast shrewdly 
remarks that this second kind of depravity would be readily 
betrayed under the influence of wine. 

270 



NOTES TO BOOK II 650 a 

a 6. Tr)v a\X(s)s (sc. 68ov) means lit. "along the road that does 
not lead to anywhere in particular," i.e. where there are no special 
consequences to be apprehended, and the following words furnish a 
definite explanation of what is meant. We might almost translate 
then "at large." Cp. Theaet. 172 e Kal ol aywve? ovSeirore tyju 
aAAws aAA' del tt^i/ Trepl avTov. 

b 2. dX\-qX(DV : this word introduces the idea that it is the duty 
of every citizen to take stock of his neighbour's disposition. 

b 3. TO T€ rr]<s eiJTeAetas, " and in the matter of economy." 
(St. takes to ttJs evreXcta^ ktX. as the subject of Sta^epeiv.) As 
at 635 b 6 (to twv Xvttmv Kal <^o^a>v) it is a periphrasis for the 
simple article with the same case of the subs. He might have 
said Trpo<s evreXeiav (cp. Phil. 55 c 8ta^e/3€tv 7rpo<s dperyjv, Gritias 
11 7 d TOts TravTwv hia<^kpovcriv Trpbs ttiVtiv), but he uses 
7rp6<s in a different sense with /Saa-dvovs later in the sentence 
("in comparison with"). For the simple ace. in this sense 
with Siacfiepo} cp. Arist. Clouds 503 ovSev StotVct? Xat/O€<^c3i/Tos 

T'qV (fiVCTLV. 

b 6. Twi/ y^prja-ijX{)iTdr<j)v eV, " outstanding among things of 
greatest use" — "of unique benefit" (to the statesman's art). — 
Th yvwvat is epexegetic to tovto. 

b 9. TT-oXiTiKris continues the construction of 77s (" whose business 
it is — and it is, I imagine, the business of TroAtTiKry "). Cp. the 
quotation from the Politicus given above on 649 d 9. 



BOOK II 

652 a 2. auTwi/, " the subject," i.e. 1^ ev oiVw Siarpi/Si^f (rv/x- 
7ro(rta, referred to at 650 b 1 as tovtojv : avrd then (supplied) is 
the subject of the following e^ct. 

a 3. Tt fxkyeSos wc^cAias : so vxp-q koI KaXXrj KVTrapiTTcov at 
625 b 8, aWepos /3d9os Eur. Med. 1297, to xprjfxa twv vvKTOiv Ar. 
Nub. 1, xpvcrov iinov Plut. 268, ttovtliov tc Kv/xaTcov dv^piOjjLOv 
ykXaa-iia P. F. 89. 

a 6. oiryj 8€ Kol OTTWS : with this we must supply, not a-q/xaiveLv 
/SovXcTat but, evecTTL. 

b 1. fxiTj TTYj Trapa7ro8L(r6(oix€v vir avrov : the Aoyos, which has 
just been spoken of as " hinting " a certain conclusion, is here 
credited with the power, if not the inclination, of " ensnaring," i.e. 
misleading its followers, if they are not wide awake. The word 

271 



652 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

is only found (in Plato) here and at Ep. 330 b, where it means 
" catch," " entangle," much as it does here. 

b 3. Tt TTore Xkyoixiv : so the MSS. ; Madvig conjectured rt 
iror eAeyo/x€v. The imperfect is more usual in such a clause 
depending on dvaiJLvrjcrOrjvai^ but the pres. will stand perfectly 
well. The -^jxiv favours the present : the definition given at 
643 d 6 ff. is to stand for them still. 

653 a 1. rovTov yap, . . . crinTripia (see below 654 d 8, where 
what is here called o-ioTrjpia is called (f>vX.aK'q), " if I am not 
mistaken, this institution (of o-v/xTrocria), if properly conducted, is 
a safe-guard of education " — i.e. is a means of preserving the effect 
of education. cr(0Tif]pia (without the article) ecrrt tovtov (v . . , 
does not mean as much as "education depends on" (Jowett). For 
this use of cnoTrjpia cp. Rep. 425 e edv ye deos avroi? St8u> (TioTrjptav 
TMV vo/xiDV wv efXTrpocrOev SiT^Xdo/xev. — L and have tovto for 

TOVTOV. 

a 4. jxeya Xeyet§, " that is a strong thing to say," " that is 
taking high ground." 

a 5. Aeyo) TOLvvv . . ., " this is what I say : a child's first 
infantile sensations are those of pleasure and pain ; and these 
sensations are the sphere in which the soul first acquires goodness 
or badness. Wisdom and fixed right opinion come to specially 
favoured men as they are getting old, and certainly a man who 
gets them, and all the blessings in their train, is a perfect man. 
The first acquisition of goodness by a child is, I say, a matter of 
education. Clearly, if pleasure and liking, and pain and dislike, 
for the right things, are implanted in the soul of one who cannot 
yet reason about them, and if, when he does arrive at a reasoning 
age, these sensations concur with his reason to pronounce that his 
character has been properly formed by his relatives, this harmonious 
combination, in its entirety, is Virtue, while the part of it which 
consists of the rightly trained sensations of pain and pleasure, 
whereby the man hates what he ought to hate, from his childhood 
up, and likes what he ought to like — it is just that element which, 
if I am right, is Education, and so for purposes of our discussion I 
would distinguish and define it." 

a 7. <f)p6vr](Tiv 8e KOi ktX. : lit. '* about wisdom — and fixed 
right opinions — I say that it is lucky for a man if he acquires it 
as he is getting old." The accusatives are not exactly absolute : 
the construction is a conversational extension of such a sentence as 
TTjv cfipovrja-Lv Aeyw otl Tra/oayty verat. — The number of irapeykveTO 
(a gnomic aorist) emphasizes the fact that cfipovrja-tv is the 

272 






NOTES TO BOOK II 653 a 

prominent word among the preceding accusatives. Cp. Cic. 
De fin. V. 21 "praeclare enim Plato: beatum cui etiam in senectute 
contigerit ut sapientiam verasque opiniones assequi posset." — For 
/Se/Saios in this connexion cp. Tim. 37 b So^at Kal Trio-rei? ytyvov- 
TUL /SejSatOL Kal dk-qOets. 

b 1. I think, with some hesitation, that it is better to take 
TratSetai/ as the predicate. The definition of ivhat education is 
comes at the end of the speech (b 6-c 4). 

b 4. Adyo) XafjiPdvetv, " to treat (the matter) philosophically, — 
to reason about it." Aoyw Xa^eiv tl is a variety for Aoyov Xaf^eiv 
TLVOS ; cp. above 638 c Travres ol Aoyw tl XafSovTes iTrtrrySei'/Lta 
and Parm. 135 e nepl eKecva a fxaXiCTTd tls dv Aoyw Xd(3ot. — 
8vvafx€V(j}v depends on xJ/vxciS ; Xa^ovTwv is a gen. abs., which 
perhaps would not have been used thus without its subject, if it 
had not been for the preceding gen. Swafxevoyv. — crv/JLcfxDVi^crwa-L : 
the subject to this must be rjSovrj Kal (f^iXia ktX. So, I find, 
Apelt, ut sup. p. 5. He says : " Das eiridv/xy^TLKov, ohne Unterstiit- 
zung von Seiten des eigenen Xoyos, bisher von anderen zum Guten 
erzogen, wird nunmehr, da der eigene Verstand ausgebildet ist, zu 
seiner Freude gewahr, wie richtig es erzogen worden ist." For 
another way of describing the union between pleasure or appetite 
and reason or wisdom cp. 688 b Kal Trpos wpMTTjv tyjv rrj<s 
(rvfJLTrda-rjs rjjefxova dp€TT]S, (f)p6vYj(TLS S' €ly) tovto koI vovs Kal 8o^a 

JJL€t' CpWTOS T€ Kttl eTrt0U|JLiaS TOUTOIS eTrOjX€l'T|S. 

_ .. b 6. I am strongly inclined to agree with F.H.D. who would 
bracket e^wv, and take TrpocrrjKovTiDv as masc. This gives vtto a 
more natural sense ; but it is difficult to see how Wo)v came in : 
perhaps it was a marginal additional to av/x^covta. — a-vpLiracra : lit. 
**in its entirety," i.e. the two elements of correctly formed habit 
and moral insight taken together. 

b 7. TO reOpap^fxevov is lit. " the part of it trained rightly." 
We should find it more natural in English to say "the training 
(in feeling pleasure or pain) is education"; what Plato says is 
rather : " the result of the training is education," as above at b 1 
and 2, i.e. " a child so trained is a child educated." (Cp. Steele's 
" To have loved her was a liberal education.") 

C 2. a7roT€/xa)v tw Xoyo) : it is difiicult to be sure whether tw 
Xoyio denotes the instrument by which the distinction is made, or 
the (quasi) person in whose interest the distinction is made : I 
think, the latter. 

C 3. Kara ye Tr)v ep^riv (sc. So^av) : St. cps. Phil. 41 b 4 dXX, w 
Ilp(i)Tap)(^e, elcrlv Kara ye rrjv epn^v, Rep. 397 d edv rj e/xry, ecfirj^ vlk^. 

VOL. I 273 T 



^ THE LAWS OF PLATO 



This whole paragraph should be carefully compared with R^. 
401 b ff., more especially with the following passages : d 1 KactvUv, 
Ik waisLv Xavddvy d, 5^>o»r,Ta « Kal <^a.a. Ka. crv,..#><o..a. 
rc5 KaA« Aoy.}, ayovcra, and e 3 Ka. KaT.fxoi^evo, .« r^. 
^ilv^. Tpec/.o.T S.V 6.^' airCv Kal y.'yvo^ro KaXos « Kaya^os, ra 

y„a,p.Yo,r 8i' okc.cST^ra y.6.Xu7Ta o oi,T<o Tpa,^««. Cp. also Ar. 

Lrect this passage. At least seven alterations ot the te=.t^have 
been proposed, of which Schanz adopts Stephanus's ^.^a.ow for 
%iilJiu a 8, and Eusebius's Adyov fo^; ,^"W, f ^1« 1- P". 
nounces op^Ss ... i^Cov to be corrupt. I have followed Burnet 
•nTavin'g the text as the chief MS3. have it, merely writing, 
with him' and Schanz, .v.^ VS' for the MS avr,, «, where 
Eusebius has ai-rr, .VS', and suggesting the athetesis of ,0o^v.) ^ 

C5 m ^rpoT.pi,.': two things were said above about 7ra.8»a 
at 643 bff : (1) "As the twig is bent the tree inclines, -i e. il 
you tt a child ,lay at a thing, when he grows -P ^-^n i^fe 
that thin"" and (2) What he means by education i^, that ot 
cllracter aid dispolition, not that of special faculties ; i.e. he wants 
to make a good citiam, not a good carpenter, etc. , , . . 

Tf^M. oi.dv: here again he does ^t/^,*^™';^ 
is education, but the rightly trained or schooled dehgh and i s 
opposite are education : I think here again we may translate aie 
matters of education." „, 

C9 Kara TToXXa: this is the reading of the Mfab. ilje 
Aldine edition read ra .oXXa, and was followed by all the early 
Editions including that of Ast. Even after the d-overj^ that Ae 
MSS. read Kara xoXXA, Stallbaum m his ™f .™1-,^'^- '^\;™^ 
editors, and Schanz prefer to read ™ .oXXa, «« J^^l^^S 
that Aldus, by accident or design, had got back to what Plato 
wrote It does not seem to have been sufficiently noticed that 
though the syntax gains greatly by the reading ra ^oXXa, the 
ense is materially ^tered. Did Plato mean to say that most of 
he effect of education, as he interprets the word -a- off in 
ordinary life, or only tbat a .oo. .0^ ^^^^Inot^^^^T^ 
he had no reading but ra TroAAa betore nim, uut^s 
the subj. of xaX and 8.a</.9., but transktes it yiarj^- T^^ 
more moderate statement seems to me more 'natural here, ^o I 
have followed Burnet in printing Kara xoXXo. 7ra.8.>a, the ^ ord 



NOTES TO BOOK II 653 c 

most in our thoughts all through this passage, must be supplied 
as the subject of xa^arat aud SiaffiOeiperaL. We are now going to 
see exactly what the Ath. meant at a 3 by saying that rj iv otvco 
a-vvovcrta was a preservative of education. Kara TroAAa then is 
" to a great extent." 

d 2. ai'ttTravAas re . . . era^avro ras tcov eoprojv (I/jlol/Sols, 
KUL Moixras . . . eSoa-av, tv cTravopOoyvTat, tols re Tpo(f)a.<; yevo- 
/x€j'as iv Tttis eopraU pcTo. OeQv : Burnet has, I think, shown 
the right way to read this passage by putting a comma after 
iiravopQCovrai. — The gods, says the Ath., not only provided 
festivals, by way of variety, to rest men from their labours, but 
gave them the Muses, Apollo, and Dionysus to show them how to 
celebrate them rightly, and (in so doing) gave men a refreshment 
to their souls (as we should say) — lit. "and gave them the spiritual 
nourishment (ra? rpo(f)d<s, see on 643 d 1) which, thanks to the 
gods (jx€Ta Bidv), is furnished by the festivals." — ras rCov kopruiv 
d/M0L/3as [rots Oeois] : Clemens Alex., in quoting this passage, 
leaves out roh deois (which is in all MSS.). Ast was, I think, 
right in holding the addition to have been made by some scribe 
who only knew a/^ot/?ai in the sense of requital. Here it means 
" change " or " variety," and the gen. kopT^:^v is a gen. of definition 
(not, I think, "the round of feasts" — we should say : "gave them 
festivals as a relief'). (Zeller, Plat. Stud. p. 95 defends roU O^oU, 
making it depend on toprwi'.) 

d 4. IV eiravopOoJvTaL : before Burnet all interpreters took err. 
as governing ra? rpocfids, and either ejected or altered the re which 
all MSS. place between these two words. (Schanz and Ritter 
further approve of Wagner's alteration of yevofxevas to yevofxevoi.) 
kwavopdiovTaL is middle : its subj. is the Muses, Apollo, and 
Dionysus, and its object ra? eo/aras understood. 

d 5. /x€Ta diuiv is difficult : the gods seem to be those just 
mentioned. — o^ai' a xp^ Trorspov ktX., "about this we must see 
whether, etc." Then, instead of going on " whether it is true or 
not," he goes on : " whether the now prevailing Aoyos is true to 
nature, or how it is "—lit. "whether our Adyos is dinned into 
our ears true.'' (A Florentine MS., L 85. 9, has odv in the 
margin as a variant for a ; this makes the construction easier ; all 
the earlier editions read ovv: Schanz prefers Srj.) A somewhat 
similarly framed sentence occurs at Rep. 399 e plov pvOp^ovs ISeiu 

KOCrfllOV T€ Kal dv8p€L0V TtV€<S fLCTLV. 

d 6. vfj.v€tTaL lyuv : the metaphor is possibly due to the recent 
mention of Apollo and the Muses. The word is used of an oft 

275 



553 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

repeated statement or argument ; cf. Re'p. 549 d kol aAAa 8^ oo-a 
KoX Ota <^lXov(Tiv at yvvaiKes Trept twv TOtoi;Ta)V v/xvetv. 

e 2. ofov, " you might almost say." — /xe^' i^Sov^s : see below 
on 654 a 3. — T7po<nTai(ovra : though there is no dative with the 
verb, the irpocr- is not "otiose"; it denotes the joining ^others in 
playing, "joining in a game." So at Eiithyd. 283 b wr^drjTrjv . . . 
rjtxas . . . Trai^'etv , . . Kat Stot ravra TrpooreiraLcrarrjv. 

e 4 f. rd^€0)v : ra^t?, order, system the Greeks naturally held to 
be the foundation of all science.— ois shows a sturdy disregard of 
logic, to say nothing of grammar : it is only the rajets, not the 
aragtas to which oh refers : the perception of raget? involves the 
perception of their opposites, and Plato will not omit this fact ; 
at the same time he finds the illogical relative oh a convenient 
sentence-link. As we have seen before, he often prefers the neuter 
pronoun when talking of things with feminine names. 

e 5. pvOfios Kol apixovU : the fact that these and many other 
Greek scientific terms still live in modern languages is a witness 
to the creative power of the Greek intellect ; but it must not be 
forgotten (1) that in the course of centuries the words have taken 
on new associations and connotations, and (2) that when the 
Greeks were making the sciences, they were also making scientific 
nomenclature. The words they chose as technical expressions 
were mostly words in common use, such as shape, measure, row, 
form, floio and the like, and we must not expect them to have 
acquired at once a strictly limited technical application. In the 
discussion of /xovo-tK-/; which follows we shall find, e.g., the words 
pvOp-o^ and crx^/xa, /xeAos and apfxovLa, whether used separately, 
or contrasted one with another, so variously applied that we cannot 
always translate them in the same way. 

The. Greeks seem to have been about as sensitive to order and 
system in hodily motion as in sound. Our mufiled perceptions 
make it hard for us even to guess what opxw'-^ meant to Plato. 
It is to some extent the same with the formal element in language : 
we cannot hope to understand the Greeks thoroughly when they 
criticize the rhythm of poetry or prose. Their sensibilities in 
such matters were keener than ours. 

pvOp.6s, as Plato tells us below (664 e 8), is the name given tc 
systematized movement {rfj ttJs Kivrjo-eoys rajet). The material oj 
this systematized movement may be bodily movement, speech, oj 
musical sounds. The word is from the same root as pew, thougl 
we have no trace of its use in the sense of a flowing. It is possibh; 
that it gained its special sense of measure and regular recurrenc\ 

276 



NOTES TO BOOK II 6536 

from the sense of the evenness of the motion of fl aids, as compared 
with that of most solids, but, in its S2)ecial use, it is more probably 
an echo, so to speak, of the sound of the recurring waves on the 
sea-shore as heard by the Greeks. "Ap/xovia, as we learn from the 
same passage below (665 a 1), is the name given to the effect pro- 
duced by the juxtaposition of musical notes of different pitch. 
Sometimes " pitch " will translate the word, sometimes even " tune." 
Sometimes it is used with a reference to the arithmetical relations 
of the different notes of the scale, while sometimes it means scale^ 
or style of music. 

654 a 1. The Tois before Oeovs, which H. Stephanus wanted to 
eject, adds to the demonstrative force of the following tovtovs. 

a 2. rrjv ivpvdfiov re Kal ivapfxovLov aLcrdrja-iv, " the sense of 
rhythm and pitch," whereas evpvdjxov, as suggested by a marginal 
variant in L (which does not also suggest evap/xoa-rov for evap- 
lx6viov)j introduces the further notion of the adaptability or the 
careful preservation of pvO/xos. 

a 3. ficd' rjSovrjs : these words (repeated from 653 e 2) are of 
great importance to the Athenian's theory. The gods whom he 
called men's o-vviopTaa-Tai gave them not only artistic sensibilities, 
but the power of enjoying them as well. As the author of Ecce 
Homo says (chap, x.) "The highest perfection of pleasure is not 
among the prizes of exertion, the rewards of industry or ingenuity, 
but a bounty of nature, a grace of God." — For y 8rj all the MSS. have 
1557/ : it was first corrected by Aldus. — y is an instrumental dative and 
aia-Qya-Lv fxeO' -qSovq^^ is its antecedent. — ^op-nyelv and o-vvci/jovras 
go closely together, the participle being the more significant of the 
two. — vy/xwv : for the gen. with x^PT/^^^ cp. Theaet. 179d8 : the 
vulgate rjjjLLv has no MS. authority. 

a 4. dXXrjXovs, the reading of and the early editions, 
involves a construction foreign to the habits of the word. It is 
easy to supply rj/xas, as obj. to crwdpovras, from the preceding 
rjfMa<s and rjfxiov. 

a 5. A has (over the line) to before irapa and space for two 
letters after -rrapa. Schanz justly conjectured that a scribe had 
(wrongly) altered -rrapa ro into to irapa (which is also the reading 
of 0). For the causal meaning of Trapd c. ace. cp. the orator 
Lycurgus 64 rjyovfxaL 8' eywye, 5 dvSpes, rovvavTiov tovtois, Trapa 
Tovrov dvat ryj iroXei ryv (Tior-qpiav (cp. also Thuc. i. 141. 7). 
We may translate here : "because of the name joy which comes 
natural to them." The vulgate followed and the corrector of 
A (though Bekker and the Ziirich editors left the to out alto- 

277 



654 a 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

gether) : rh cJvo/xa was taken closely with <ovo;xaKlva, and ^^^ 
geui^ ; w^c; taken to mean '' ductum a laehtia'' (St.). -but 

;r/:7-rAtU: is lUs used w^h a ...» (to say nothing 
of the difficulty then of translating .i^fvrov) :,^^tity,U>v^ 

a 9 Since the first stage of education is due to he if^tit"'",^ 
of the vopos " a^affi^vro, will (at that stage) mean "XOP-"'- .^"J 
:L educated pupil will be the one who has been thoroughly drilled 

"irtf ..woXov i.r.v, "is a generic name for" So below 
Z^f'ri, .^.oXo. aX..r.K^) T^ a^.oXo. IS t he subje 

Ji^iai^-rrgr; r^^s ^i^^^d-;^^ ri. ion. if 

of art, and acts up tu ^ ^ „oi;mK>i if he is number one or 

..an better educated in x^,«^^^^^^ 

::t"c.: i^ntde^Zel tf express, "^^ » ^IS^r^^^ 
%r il' "nl^irrrSi^^^^^^^ - fe^" "" ^ 

— r?;Iri:es-^^^^^^^^^^ 

;Lrto tbe'f^lS St 1- what is right and goci, and a disgi., 
at all that is --g^^^^.^t'^^.h a man as I have just described.' 

Th7ru:iaiT(=-o-A -'^-'^ --ly ^^1 r'"" '"-"■' 

^Je oUow d ist in rejecting, is put in to show that o ro.o.. 

tTot antecedent to o, '^ ^f^' ^ ^:r'^,:;Z 1^^ 
TliP same motive perhaps led to the siiglitiy irregui ^^ ^^ 
u': ofT, a. for L. Burnet retairis J^e^ .before o, a. U, 
I cannot follow hiin - P^j'lJ^/J^fr.tTmpTlt difficult 
there should be no f P f ^'J "fg^^^ ^,ea.. There seem to n 



NOTES TO BOOK II 654 c 

irregular here for firjSe (at Eathyphro 5 b 6 t) is " or else "), but, in 
the absence of some such words as tw vw with Stavoetcr^at, it would 
have to be taken with tt^ (fxavrj kol no o-cofMaTL. Burnet's comma 
after KaropOovv is not enough to save the situation. I have there- 
fore adopted Badham's correction of t) SLavoeicrdaL to y StavoetTat. 

C 4. ovTios avTOL<s y^prjrai : i.e. " shows by his dealing with them 
that he thus thinks." For outcus " in accordance with this " cp. 
670 d 6. 

c 6. crw/xart and (fxuvrj are datives of the instrument : to 5ta- 
voi]6^v elvai KaXov is an ace. of the inner object — the service 
performed ; cp. Rep. 467 a ^laKovelv /cat virrjpeTelv irdvTa to, irepX 
Tov TToXe/vtov, where, as here, the person to whom the service is 
performed is left to be understood. 

d 1. It is best to take KaropOovv as intransitive here as well as 
in the next line, and not, with St., to supply to Stavo-qdev (ilvai) 
KaXov as its object. 

d 4. " The advantage of the education you describe is great," 
i.e. of the education of No. 2. 

d 5. ovKovv ktA., " if then we three (being agreed, as we 
are, about the necessity of properly felt rj^ovq and Xvirrj) know 
what is right and good in wSt^ and 6pxr](Ti<s . . ." 

d 7. opOojs goes with TreTratSev/zei/ov and (in a way) with awai- 
6ei'Tov' — " the man who is and who is not correctly educated." 

d 8. TratSetas (jivXaKrj : a reference to the (norrfpia (TraiSetas) 
spoken of at 653a. — kol ottov, "and where it is to be found." 
That is, in order to decide the question with which we started 
about Tj €v otvo) (Tvvova-ia, we must first make sure that we have 
correct canons of taste in both departments of povcriK-q. 

e 3. t'xvei'oi'crats : see above on drjpeveiv at 627 c 9. 

e 4. I have adopted C. Ritter's Kar for the MS. kol before 
ioBrjv. It is clear from what follows that what we are now to 
decide is, what is a right and good <T\ripa ? and what is a right 
and good /xeAo? ? and that the word crxyjfMa is used of the per- 
formance of the " dancer,'' and /xtAos of that of the singer. Hence, 
even if we keep Kal we should have to give it a loose translation, 
such as " that is to say we are discussing." But this would be 
"flabby" in Greek, and Kar is neat and precise, besides being 
palaeographically probable. For this use of Kara cp. Gorg. 474 e 
Ttt Kara r>)v ixova'LKr]v Trdvra, and Rep. 382 e ovre ciAAov? e^aTrar^ 
ovTe Kara ^avracria^ or're Kara Aoyovs, oijt€ Kara (Trjp.€Lwv 
TTo/uTTaf. The chiasmus is no objection to this view. — For (r\rjpLa 
it is hard to find an English word : perhaps posture is the best ; but 

279 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 
6546 



it does not convey to us the notk>n of ™»— "^^^f^^Jl^^^rbJ 
body as well as that of shape and mte«, which are all conveyea Dy 

"^5. ^'' Pariter in verbis 8.a^.yo.Ta olxv'r^ra. imago a venatione 
...ntaesV^A^.^ ,^ ^,,^ Pa,Pa,..^s VO^^^^^ 

-''^:^zt:r:^t::^^^ t::. fro. 

convey a ^i^^*^^^^\7''^' „ J ^ Plato had appealed to foreign 
foreigners. Above, at 637 d ^nd e ^^^^^ ^^ ^ 1^ to 

Xp^Mara in a ™f^^P'J°™,;.„i ^ ^^a attractiveness conferred o 
diction, and next of *« j^" '^^^^"^ ^" .„ . ji^i, attractiveness I 



eVrrtv that follows. 



'''':, 7C7-<rx^,a: we have the same chiasmns here as 
654 e 4 The words Ap^o"'" and eidp^o^rov apply here to t 
„ao9 and 01.6^109 and d'pv0i^ov to the o-xrj/i.a. 

the Athenian 'proposed, " if his audience liked," to go through , 



NOTES TO BOOK II 

virtues, beginning with dvSpeca^ for the purpose then before them • 
m fact he only got througli dvSpeta and <r(o<j>po(rvvrj. So here in 
a different argument, he finds it enough to take one virtue and to 
treat it as typical of all the rest, leaving it to his audience to 
think out the way m which other virtues can be expressed in 
o-X7?Ma and /xeAo?. It would no doubt have been a congenial task 
to Plato to do this himself, but, at his age, he had not time for it. 

. ,^^-., ^^^^ T^^^ ^^v^ been variously punctuated : -^p.tu, diravTa 
aTTAws eo-TO> ' ra fi^v . . . • 7}/x?v, dtravra c^ttAw? ^axio rk fikv . . . 
(Ast). The punctuation in the text— now generally adopted— was 
suggested by St. in a note (1859 ed.) but not printed in his text.— 
uttAws is " once for all.' 

b 4. etre avr^s, dre rivhs eUovos, " whether they consist in an 
expression of the virtue itself, or are concerned with an image of 
It" ; i.e. whether the gesture or the exclamation is the outcome of 
actual virtue of the mind or exceUence of the body (as is described 
at 654 e 10 ff. m the case of courage), or whether (as in the case of 
an actor), the virtue or excellence only exists in the artist's 
imagination (as we should say). The gens, avr^? and eUSvo, are 
m apposition to dperij^, and governed, like it, by evc^uem 
(Ritter s discussion of the passage is helpful, but it is surely perverse 
ot him to^take ^^x^? and o-c^fxaros as dependent on cxwo-ra Kal 
^, ?• . Tf ^ith him (as with St.) refers to x/^vx^,. He takes 
avTq rj (avSpeca) x/^vx-j as the real (brave) man, and eU^v (r^s 
avdpetas fvxq^) as an artist's or poet's conception of him.) 

,,,V; jpf^l /^poxaXy, "a good proposal!" Cp. Rep. 576 e 
aAA opOm, e4>y^, TrpoKaXf} . . . Kal Trepl t(3v dv8pi;iv ra aT^r^ 
Tavra 7rpoKaXovfi€vos 6p0^<s av irpoKaXoL/JL-qv. 

h 9. €Ti 57) ToSe : from this point down to d 3 we are con- 
cerned with a difficulty ; it is this : It is a general opinion that the 
function of art is to please ; different people are pleased by different 
artistic representations (xop^vf^ara). We have just laid it down 
that good art means virtue and bad art vice : do those who make 
the mistake of liking best something which is not really best, do 
so because they like vice? No one will confess to that, at any 
^te ; It IS almost blasphemous to suppose it. The solution of the 
difficulty, given in the following paragraph (d 5-656 a 5), is that 
tastes are not formed without a process of habituation : we cannot 
see the significance of anything so complicated as a xo>ev^a,- 
which Itself depends for its significant representation on tmined 
fiabits of imitation— any more than we can he good without 
liavmg gone through the process of forming our character and 



655 b 



^ ^ THE LAWS OF PLATO 

tastes bv long habit. (That is where education comes in, and 
r:; I b:d' education does har..) The .a»e quesUon ..th 
regard to pleasure in general is propounded at Rep. 681 ett, ami 
answered in much the same way as it is here. 

c3 The MSS. had Aeyw/xev corrected m A to X^yoixtv. Ihe 
iy Which is rather awkward, must go with dva.. Hermann and 
Schanz read Xeyom«v, but this does not mend matters : av «rai 
fst" otH,«/corstr'uction for a. «", in a direct form of .uestion; 

Las ■ it is implied that, if we like different things, some of us 
lust make the 'mistake (xX-i.,) of thinking that ^-t -h-^ is no 
best Either, then, best has different meanings for different people 
according to their nature, or some of us do not see clearly.-As I 
read the passage, the latter suggestion opens the way for the 

explanation at^ airi : an unusual severance of the rairi by the 

introduction of the particle ,.«.. (Stallbaum would read ravra i^v 

avTOL, Schanz ravra fiev.) 

c 5 oi yap ^ov ipu y^ r« : the argument ot this sentence 
depends on the consideration introduced by the following Ka.rot 
xLv<Tiv vc ; therefore it is wrong to put a full stop after ,.cvay 
rwi. "Men always say that what they like is the right sort ot 
uovcrtK.; ■ you will never find a man confessing that he hkes the 
ricl^^and degraded -.-in other words, that the degraded and 
vicious uow^kIis better than that which is morally of the opposite 
kind" (And yet it is said that a theatrical manager once secured 
a large audience for a piece by advertising it as " the worst play in 

dTff "Seeing that choric performances are representations of 

ways and manners, and deal with most varied kinds of actions and 

situations, and that the individual performers depend for then 

Ide ing on a mixture of trained habit and imitative power 

a0c<T. L „^cr.<rc), it is necessary that those (performers) who 

Zl word, tun?or gesture after their own fashion, whether this is 

due to their natural disposition or their previous famiharity with 

them or to both, should not only like and praise such representa- 

Hons but also should pronounce them to be right and good ; whik 

heT'cannot possibly like, or approve of, or help caUing bad repre- 

senfations which are repugnant either to t^eir --'^l disposition 

or to the way of thinking with which they are familiar Th( 

perM^ls here spoken of are not professional actors, but every 

reader or reciter of a poem with all its accompaniments ; cp. 656 a 2 



NOTES TO BOOK II 655 d 

— yiyi'o/xeva agrees with /Ai/xr^/xaTa and to, Trepl ras ^opctas (so Ast), 
and may be compared to the similarly used kvovaav (which I con- 
jecture ought to be read kvova-ai) at Polit. 258 d 9 — he is there speak- 
ing of rkyyai — at Se yc irepl rcKTOViKrjv av Kal (rvfjLTraiTav \€Lpovp- 
yiai/ iLxrirep €v rat? Trpa^eonv ivovcrav (Tvpcf>vTov rrjv €Tr i(rTrjp.r]V 
K€KTr]VTat. — Many editors take yiyvofxeva as the object of Ste^tovrtov ; 
Orelli would omit the /cat after -qdea-t — Badham also, reading 
p.Lp,rjcr€i for the vulgate /xt/xry/xao'i. — But rj^ecrt, added to irpd^ecn 
and Tv;)(ai5, would, after fjLLp.-jp.ara rpoivoiv, be tautological, but, 
when taken instrumen tally with Ste^idvrwi/, it has a due signifi- 
cance. — -qdea-L kul pifx-qcrea-i (so L and for the ptp-qpaa-t of A) 
I take to be a sort of hendiadys, and to have been foreshadowed 
by the rpoiroL and Trpd^ets kol rvxat of real life. (It has been — 
quite unnecessarily — suggested that we ought to alter pip-qcreori 
(or rather piprjpacrL) to crx'^poLcn, or again to irady^pacn.) — For 
the idea cp. Re^p. 395 d at ptprjcrcLs, eav €k veiov iroppo) SiaTeAccroxriv, 
€is €$7] T€ KOL K^vcTLV Ka$L(rTavTaL Kal KaTo. crwpa Kal <f)(j}vd<s Kal 
Kara rrjv Siavoiav. 

,:^,d7. There is a connexion of ideas between irpos rpoirou and 
the pip-qpara rpoTrwi' two lines above. 

e 1. Kara cfiva-cv : Plato does not leave out of sight the possi- 
bility that some people may like bad things because they are bad 
by nature. 

e 4. With alcrxpd t€ Trpoa-ayopeveiv we must supply avayKatov 
€(TTL from the preceding clause. 

e 5. ofs S' dv ktA. : Plato does not find it necessary for the 
argument to consider the case of the man whose nature and train- 
ing are both bad. He has first explained how it comes about that 
different people enjoy difterent xo/sei'/zara ; now he explains how 
it is that sometimes the actions and professions of th6 same person 
are inconsistent. 

e 7. ovTOL Se : the resuming, repeated Se ; cp. Symp. 220b 4 ovtos 
S\ Phaedo 78 c a Sc . . . ravra Se, 113 e ot 6' dv , . . tovtovs Se. 

656 a 3. KLvelcrdaL tw criopaTL : these words, and the follow ing 
^Sctv, show that the Athenian, for the last ten lines, has had in 
mind, not spectators, but \op€VTai themselves. 

a 4. (US d7ro<f)aiv6p€voL KaXd p^rd cnrovSyjs, "as they would 
thereby deliberately declare their approval." 

a 6. A and 0^ have Atyots, L and have Aeycts : Hermann 
adopts Schmidt's opOorar dv Acyots (like the KaAAtcrr dv at 897 e 7, 
but the cases are not similar), Schanz opdorara Aeyots dv. So at 
Rep. 610 a 4, where the MSS. have opOoraT dv Acyets, Hermann 

283 



^^^ THE LAWS OF PLATO 

reads cpSoTaT Av Alyo«. ^ Probably, both here, and at Rep. 610 a, 
tTip correct reading is opOoTara Aeyeig. r. j - 

a 7 mL oSv t. : we had ,.S,. oiv at 624 a 7 and we find ^-v 
„ I'aTfoZv) at Prot. 310d 4. The i.ff ,>T..a is used like 
IL L: £: at ^63 d 9. In A the , is " in ™-< ^'^Jf;- 
„?v T. is "ex(m w««m" (Burnet and bchanz). Sc^anz cu s out 
these three words. His av after A^yots ("5 »» rasi.ra ) flUs the J 
«ap left by the ^ of ^,3v.-The Athenian asks, "Do you think 
fhen that the man who takes pleasure in gestures or songs of an 
V 1 c^Ict Tuffers at all (fro'm so doing)? or that ni^ w^o find 
Xasure in the opposite direction (i.e. m good songs) get any 
Advantage from it r The whole question is in loose conversational 

'*^' a 8 ^ovr^pia, : for the gen. used in place of an adj cp. Arist 
Poet 1454 a 28 .ov,p.'« Vi^o.,, and below 660 a 2 .,v 8. ™. 

"""fio" ^Jk^ n . . -V /^ox^^P-v; CI. "I expect they do." 
Ath "Won't yolgo further Chan that, and say that they can'* help 
tL in the sLe plight as the n>an who sees bad men's evil ways 
not with dislike but' with enjoyment, notwithstanding the per- 
fanctory disapproval which a dim notion of his own depravity 

to L;.r by a 'contrary proce. the EngUsh a. is used as a 
relative ^^T^:^:^, ., ,ot, I think, "playfully" (Jowett) 
but^' Perfancto^n V' "not seriously" ; xa.S.a is constantly contrased 
with rJo S\ and 'in this connexion it gets the notion of ^ child s; 
play" and "make-believe" ; cp. Laws 889 d ^a.8.as xtvas, a^(k.a 

the man is said to treat his own evil propensities as if they ^^u, 

" ''bT ai.roS A and so Burnet : airoS, (apparently) the readin. 
of th -othe; Ms"^., s,ems to me to give the right -s. " 
seems to have read ovtSv (? masc). a„Toi. (neut.) is, I ^W«f ■ ' 
beTrantlated "of such conduct."-T,5T., "on such an occasion^ (i. 
in he very moment when he forbears to praise).-For o^o.o.o^ft 

"''I?'' Ik xa<r,,s d.ayK>,5 : a reference to the dvayKalov in b 
™:^: itZtZi^'^X^ -y.,,- Schanz.s introducti 



NOTES TO BOOK II 656 c 

of Trepl before r-qv. (Stallbaum takes ttjv . . . TratSet'ai/ re Kal 
iratSidv as an absolute ace. with i^ecrecrOai ; they are much more 
needed by KaAws Kci/xevoi.) — TraiSetav re kol TratStai/ : this jingle 
— the Laws shows a weakness for verbal jingles, which some may 
think senile — is a sort of summary and reminder of the previous 
argument that dance and song are the subject matter of education : 
"about the Muses' work, which is at once education and amuse- 
ment." 

C 4. pvO/xov e\6fj.€vov : a vague phrase ; " anything in the way 
of pvOixos" 

C 5-6. ev Tois \opoL<i certainly goes with 8t8acrKoi/Ta, not 
with oLTrepyd^ecrOaL ; therefore Burnet is right in putting a comma 
after x^/^ois. — ort av Tv\rj . . . /xoxOr]pLav, "turn them (the 
children) out just what he happens to be in the way of goodness 
or badness." 6 TroirjTrj'^ is, I think, the subject of TV)(r]. — 
oLTrepyd^ecrdaL on is not "produce whatever result," Toi;s TratSas 
(supplied in thought) is the object of drrcpyd^ecrOai, and on is the 
secondary predicate ; lit. " render them whatever he happens to 
be." — The Kai before tovs twv ev. it. emphasizes these words; the 
poet is imagined as teaching the children what he likes himself. 
(If oTt is the subject of tvx]7j tbie words should be translated, 
" turn them out whatever chance determines in the way of 
goodness or badness," — the " chance " ultimately being the dis- 
position which the poet happens to have.) — Ast also put a comma 
after yopot^^ but then he put another comma after rvxy, taking 
dTTipyd^ecrdaL absolutely, in the sense of informare — governing 
TraiSas understood — and taking otl dv rvxjj in apposition to tovto. 
— Tovs . . . TraiSas Kal veovs is a sort of hendiadys, chosen, 
probably, instead of veovs vratSas, because, to the author's ear, it 
improved the balance of the sentence. 

d 5. davfxa Kal aKovcrai, " the report of it will be enough to 
surprise you." 

d6. eyvwaOr] . . . oStos 6 Aoyo?, "this principle was settled." 

d 7. fxerax^ipL^ea-dat rai? crvvr^OeLais, "to practise habitually," 
lit. " to deal with by their habituations." In A the letters Heei 
in (Tvvr^deLaLS are a correction made by A^. Schanz reads 
a-vvoiHTiaLs, which, I think, is very likely what A^, but not what 
Plato, wrote. For (1) /xeTaxeLptlccrdaL (with fxekr] for object) 
would not by itself mean practise (songs), in the sense of repeat 
them until they were familiar (which is the one meaning which 
suits the passage), but with the addition of rais o-vvTjOeLacs we get 
that meaning ; and (2) rat? u-vvova-iats must have kv with it if 

285 



556 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

it is to mean " in their classes," which is simplest here — though 
it might mean " by means of their classes." It must be admitted 
that Tals a-vv-qOetais is an unusual expression, but that makes it 
less likely to have been either the mistake of a scribe, or the 
idea of a corrector. (It is perhaps worth considering whether 
fX€Tax€ipiCe(r0ai may not be passive, and (rxw^ra and /xeA.77 ace, on 
the analogy of the ace. of the thing taught with verbs ^of^ teaching.) 

e 2. Kal ofionofxara : for this the MSS. have Kal ottoV arra. ; 
which words were rejected by Schanz. Apelt, Jen. Prog. 1905, 
preferably suggests that they should be replaced by the reading of 
the text. — Kaivoroixdv applies to a modification of existing forms, 
kiTLVodv to the devising of new ones. , , „ -r 

e 3. For aXX' arra -^ A and wrongly read aAA.' arra y . — 
ovT€ €V TovTOLS ovTe €V fiova-LKYJ (rvfJiTrd(Trj : rovTOLS is neuter and 
refers to axw^^a. Though the patterns in the temples mentioned 
above were drawn, painted, or sculptured forms, the addition of 
h ixova-iKrj a-vfiirda-y shows that there were in Egypt stereotyped 
forms of song and dance as well, and so we are distinctly told at 
657 a and 799 a. 

e5. ovx w9 CTTOS etVetv . . . aXX.' 6vto)S : ^ cp. Rep. 34:1 h 
TTorepws Acyet? . . . tov ws ewos etVeiv rj tov aKpiPd Aoyw;— 
At Epinomis 987 a the author speaks of the astronomical science 
of Egypt (and Syria) as /3e/3ao-ttvto-^eva X/^ovw iivpurel re kol 

657 a 1. For the remarkable ace. H. Kichards suggests ry 
avTYj Se Texvji. I think it is not impossible that a Kara has 
dropped out before t^v. Cp. Burnet, pref. to vol. v., end of last 
paragraph but one. Perhaps this idea gets some slight support 
from the Kara ravTa in 660 b 7. 

a 7. Trepl Twv TOLOVTiov voixodeTCurOai ^e/^atw? Oappovvra . . . 
Tra/oexoyueva : so MSS.; this can hardly stand. (1) The middle 
voixoOeTela-dai is used (of a single legislator— (9a/)/)ovvTa) in 
the sense of vofxodeTetv ; (2) as vo/xo^€T€tcr^ai already has 
7re/ot Twv TOiovTixyv to complete its sense, and give the subject 
matter of the legislation, the object fieXrj is superfluous; (3) 
Oappovvra is quite out of place. The "confidence" spoken 
of at b 3 is supposed to spring from the consideration that the 
thing had been done before, and dappovvTa there is quite 
naturally introduced, but there is no sense in saying that the 
first person who made such a law did it with confidence, especially 
when the sentence begins Svi/arbv ap rjv. Only one of these 
difficulties is removed by Madvig's rejection of Sappovvra, which 

286 



NOTES TO BOOK II 657 a 

Schanz accepts. I propose to read vofxoOeTeia-Oai <Kal> I3€l3ai(i)<s 
<Kadu>povv Tot yucAry to. tyjv opdor-qra (f)va-€L 7rape;^o/x€i/a. (I 
should even like to go further and read the sentence (ort Swarov 
ap ■^v irepl twv roiovTUiv) vojxodiTOVvra /?e^ata>s KaOiepovv to, Tr)v 
{6p66ri]Ta (f>v(r€L TrapexofJLeva).) The introduction of fxeXr) is 
premature. He is dealing here with fxovcrLKrj in general. In 
view of the general corruption of the passage I think it is very- 
likely that TO, iJieX.7] was introduced from below ; also that, when 
KaOtepovv Ta became Oappovvra, the need of an infinitive led to 
the alteration of vofModerovvTa to voixoOerda-dai. The whole 
passage (from tovto S' ovv) would mean : " At all events it is an 
undoubted and a noteworthy fact in the history of /xova-LKrj that 
it was found possible for a man who was legislating about such 
things to give the effective sanction of religion to that which is 
fundamentally right." KaOiepovv gets important support from rrjv 
KaBupuidilo-av xopeiav at 657 b 6, and from 813 a 1 a 8rj (sc. fxeXrj) 
KadupuiOkvTa e<^a/>i€V 8c iv kt\. 

a 8. TOVTO : i.e. an unerring judgement — the power of conceiving 
what is absolutely c^wret opdov — in matters of art. 

a 9. Bilov T61/0S av^pos : Eusebius preserves dvSpbs, the MSS. 
3mit it, probably by an error due to the following av. — Uei : i.e. 
n Egypt, where the same divine origin was apparently claimed for 
-he Law as in Sparta and Crete. 

b 2. oTTcp cAeyoi/ : this refers probably to 656 b and c, where 
Plato had said, first, that bad " music " was as bad for the young 
IS bad company, and, secondly, that laws ought to be made to 
•egulate composers of music and poetry. — tAetv is " catch," 
'conceive" (cp. Browning's ''recapture that first fine careless 
•apture ").— ei 8vi/atTo tls . . . rrjv opOoTt^Ta : the Ath. has just 
aid that fundamental correctness (tyjv cfyvcrei opOoT-qTo) in 
wvcriKrj cannot be obtained without divine inspiration ; still, even 
hough the opOoTr^^s to which a man can attain in p^ova-LK-q is not 
»erfect, such as it is he ought — and that confidently — to prescribe 
t by law. — Though ottwo-oui' " in whatever degree " goes, strictly 
peaking, with the verb, its position makes it seem to qualify the 
Lounj cp. Phil. 64 d p.€Tpov /cat ttJs (rvfjLp.€Tpov (f)va-e(o<s p,rj 
vxovora rjTurovv kclI ottwctovv crvyKpaa-iS. This is better than, 
ith Jowett, to translate " if a person can only find in any 'way "). 

b 4. (OS : the sentence thus introduced gives one ground for the 
' ^dence just spoken of. The legislator need not be afraid of the 

a "old-fashioned." (There is thus no reason to reject, with 
V^inckelmann, the ov before /xeyaAv^i/.)— 17 t^s -qSov^^ Kal \v7rrjs 

287 



657 b 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

t-^rvo-is : an imperfect phrase for " the search for pleasure and the 
avoidance of its opposite." Badham suggested that for (r^rr^o-ts we 
ought to read vcf^^y-qcns—le. "the tendency of our likes and 
dislikes to make us crave novelty in /xovo-tKrj"— an attractive 
sucTc^estion. F.H.D. would bracket (rfreiv, taking tjSovt^'S Kat Xvirr^s 
asTubjective genitives. If we are to be content with the vulgat^, 
we must doubtless follow Stallbaum in taking toi. C^jetv (the Mb 
TTov has been universally corrected since Aldus to rov) as a gen. ol 
definition, explanatory of C',)r'ncris, after the same pattern as 
SovXeia . r^s 8odAwo-€cos at 776 d and Siarpifd-qv ^ - - r^qs 

aeXX-rWeoys at 723 d. Ast on 647 c collects many instances of a 
Timilar " perissologia," to which St. adds, among others, .Et6%rf. 
305 d eav ro{,rovs ek 86$av KaracTT^cTi^criv /x>]8evo9 8oK€tv actors 
dvat, where there is no rov, and where Badham ejects 8ok€iv and 
Naber ds 86$av. Lobeck, Paralip. p. 534, cps. Dem. De Symm. 
178 6 rod SoKdv ed Xeyecu 8o£a. eKcf^epovrac.—We may translate . 
" For the craving of our likes and dislikes manifested m the search 
after novelty in iiovaiK-q. ..." , , ^ 

b 6. (vrpbs T^) Siacj^detpai . . . 67rtKa.Wo-tt apxaiOTryra, to 
damage ... by branding it as old-fashioned." The Aldme ed. 
was again undoubtedly right in altering the MS. eTrtKaXowav to 
the nom.— The Ci'jTr^cTLS is spoken of as if it were a person actuated 
by the desire described. , . n / k r r\ 

C3. A€70/x€. A2 and Vat. 1029 (cp. on d 8), Xeyco/xev ALU.— 
For the datives governed by XP^^^^ ^P- 670 a where i/'tAo) eKarepc^ 

is governed by XPW^^^- ^^^^^ ^''^' *^" ^^*^^^ '"' ^ ''''''' "^^''l 
way than other languages do. The whole sentence may be 
translated : " Well then, we may say then— may we not ?— without 
fear of contradiction, that the right way to use p^ovctlki^ and the 
relaxation of choric performances is as follows" 

C 5 " We feel delight when we think that things are right^ 
with us, and we think that things are right with us when we feel 
delicrht" The latter half of the statement means, as Kitter says 
(Analysis p. 11), "we do well to be glad "-" the gladness does m 
good." Herein, he seems to say, is the great sanction of al 

merry-making. , 

c 8 I think Burnet is right in putting a comma after tolovtc. 

making xa''povT.9 an explanation of the three preceding words. 
d 1 avroi points the contrast between young and old : th 

former express their joy in dance and song; their elders feel th 

joy (xat>ovT€s), but it is second-hand, they are spectators onl 

[OeMpovvres). 



NOTES TO BOOK II 657 d 

d 2. TO Se T(uv irpecr/SvTepoiv rjfjiiov ktA., " as to us elders, we 
think that the proper way for us to proceed is to look on." 
There seems to be a reminiscence in the TrpcTrovrois of the opOrjv 
in c 4. 

d 3. TratSeia A, iratSi^ 0, and so A^ (Burnet). 

d 4. o TTodovvres Kal dcnra^ofMevoi ktA. (kul emphasizes acrTra^o- 
fxevoi) : i.e., while regretting our own lack of activity, we can take 
delight in that of others — in fact we encourage it, because it can 
rouse us (eTreyetpeiv) from our torpor to an imaginary {fjiVT^fxy) 
youth. It is a delightful fancy that represents the sight of 
another's joy as awakening the onlooker from the sleep of age, by 
the help of memory — or, as we should say, by the help of imagina- 
tion. — The words TtOe/jLev dyiovas at once take us in thought to a 
Greek festival, with its attendant contests in all kinds of artistic 
and other exercise, and prepare us for the eopra^ovrdyv in e 1. 

d 8. />iwv ovv ktA., " we think, — don't we ? — that there is some- 
thing in the generally expressed opinion about festal performances. 
Most people say that etc." — It is clear here again (as in c 3) that 
A- and Y were right in reading the indicative. 

e 4. Set yap 8r) . . . Ti/xda-OaL, " without doubt, as it is recog- 
nized that merry-making on such occasions is right, the man who 
gives pleasure to most people, and who gives the greatest pleasure 
ought to be most highly honoured." 

658a 1. "Not only are we right in saying so, but we should 
be right in doing so," 

a 4. Ta\v : " nota paronomasiam," Ast. 

a 5. StatpovvTes avTo Kara peprj : he has here in mind the 
distinction between the different kinds of aywv. The imaginary 
proclamation of a contest which follows is peculiar in not making 
this discrimination. 

a 6. ovTCJS aTrAtos : so at Rep. 351a and Phil. 12 c; aTrAws 
ovTiD's (pctStws ovr(j)<i ktA.) is the common order, " without quali- 
fication." — ovTLvovv seems used in the sense of "any you like." 

a 8. TrpoetTTOi : the idea is "resumed" by the noun Trpo/o/w^crews 
tn b 4. — For i^kclv after Trpouirot St. cps. Menex. 240 a etrrev 

t]K€lV. 

b 1. o<s [S'l dv ktA. : Ficinus translates : " praemiaque ei proponit, 
qui spectatores maxime delectaverit." From this Winckelmann 
naturally concludes that Ficinus read 6s dv, and Usener, who 
Tollowed by Schanz) reads 8' dv (for 8r] dv), suggests that possibly 
^€19 VLKtj-rqpia ought to stand immediately before o?. Whether the 
RTords are transposed or not, it is perhaps better (with Ficinus) to 

VOL. I 289 u 



658 b 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

take OS av as " the prize to be for the man who," than as merely 
depending on S^yiovcorfx^vov ("to find out" or "to see, who''). 
The insertion of A before A is a natural copyist's error ; or the 
8' may have been introduced intentionally by a scribe who had 
not seen to the end of the sentence.— iTrtrarro/xei/os I take to be 
passive (Ast in his Lex. gives only this passage as an example ol 
its middle use). Not only does this agree with the habit of the 
verb, but a participle agreeing with the subj. of TrpoeiTrot would 
very awkwardly disturb the course of the sentence. 

b 2 viK7)(Ty 8e : the Se is due to the suggestion m the previous 
clause that there might have been some restriction laid down as 
to the nature of the contest. 

b 3 The Kat before KpiSy is explanatory. It seems strange, as 
Ast says, that vcK-^cry should come before Kpidfj hut the Kat 
implies that the two verbs refer to the same event.— We may trans- 
late {TTpoelTTOi . . . yeyovevai) : "were by proclamation to offer 
prizes, and invite all and sundry to compete for them, m a contest 
of mere pleasure-giving-the prize to go to the man who gives 
most pleasure to the spectators, without being restricted m the 
means he employs,— all that is necessary is that he should surpass 
all rivals in producing just precisely {6tl /xAurra) this very result, 
and be pronounced to have been the most delightful among the 
competitors." The sentence is a rough one, in conversational 
style Ast rewrites it elegantly. Stallbaum, while rebuking Ast 
for his boldness, adopts, in his translation, but not in his text, 
the boldest of Ast's alterations— that of viK,)<Ty to vLK-rjcrecv ( eum 
victoriam esse reportaturuvi siquidem . . ."). ^^ 

b 6. rod Tvkpi kky€i^ ; " In what respect do you mean 1 , 

b9 ov Oavixacrrov ktA., "I shouldn't wonder if one of them 
thought that by a puppet-show he would have the best chance ot 

^ ^T'La^cos : the gist of the question is in this word. The 
point is not which performers would get most votes, but whicH 
performer ought to get most votes. So opOm at d 8. 

C 4. o)? yvoi'S av, " as if he could decide ! " 

c 5 Schanz brackets the words aKovo-ac re, which, he says, 
have been altered in A from aKovcras re. If the words are 
genuine (which I doubt), they must mean, not "hear the com- 
petitors "—which would be unbearably tautological when followed 
by a^-TT^KOos a{^Ths yeveaOai-hut, "hear what the verdict is. 

clO The Athenian's answer is a further exemplification o 
the principle enunciated in the words StatpodvTes avrh Kara fiepi 

290 



NOTES TO BOOK II 

in a 5. For the suggestion of a juvenile tribunal cp. Gorg. 464 d 
and 521 e. 

d 3. at' re ireTraLSevfxh'ai tmv yvvauKiov : this passsage and 
817 c 4, and Gorg. 502 d, have been cited as evidence that women 
were in Athens admitted to the theatre in Plato's time, at all 
events to tragedies. 

d4. TO 7rX.rjOos TTOLVTMv : St. cps. Minos 321a co-tlv Se rrjs 
7roLyj(T€cos Srj/MOTepTrea-Tarov re Kal if/vxa-yioyLKiOTarov -q TpayioSia. 

d 7. For ^iaTidkvat in the sense of recite St. cps. Charm. 162 d. 

d 9. I prefer, with Schanz, and most editors, to put a (,) rather 
than with Bekker and Burnet a (;) after etr/. 

e 3. Apelt (ut sup. p. 5) claims that all difficulty vanishes if we 
accept his alteration of e^os to eVo?. But does it? What we 
want here is a proof that " we old men," who give our verdict for 
epic poetry, are the best judges. Does it not sound puerile to 
say, " of course we are, because Epic poetry is the best " ? And 
though Apelt says that is what is said here, the words even fall 
short of that, for they are SoKel r\\uv . . . jSekria-Tov yiyv€(rdai. 
It must be admitted, though, that eOos is difficult. H. Stephanus 
altered it to rjOos, and the early editions followed him. But the 
tJ^os (of a man) would rather be used of qualities which do not 
change with age. It is more akin to (jiva-is, with which we find 
edos contrasted. We are told, six lines below, that the best judges 
must not only be pkXTicrroL, but TreTratSev/xei/oi, and that the super- 
latively good judge must be 8iacf>€po)v TratSeta as well as dpeTrj. 
Some light may be thrown on Wos here by the words rex^r] etre 
Kai TL(TLv Wea-iv of 632 d 5, and Kara Wos at 655 e 1, and the 
a-vvr]6€La of the same passage. Evidently here the advantage 
possessed by the old men is due to something in their circumstances 
and training. Ficinus takes Wos to mean experience {usus rerum 
quem ah aetate habemus), Cornarius to mean taste {affectus pi.), but 
he may be translating y^dos. Jowett translates Was by " way of 
thinking," Schneider (who takes vvv Srj to be vvvBrj) by consuetudo, 
Ritter by " Lebenserfahrung." Whatever Wo<s is, it is here pro- 
nounced to be " far the best at the present time of all that are to 
be found in any city in any part of the world." I would suggest 
that the above-quoted applications of 'Wos to training and the 
subsequent mention of TratSeta here point to the word's being used 
in the sense of ''force, or influence, of habit," i.e. training, rjp.iv 
goes with it as a possessive dative, " in our case." So, in English we 
might say our " 'M;ai/." — The words twv vvv, as Ritter says, 
suggest that possibly some day a special training in aesthetics may 

291 



658 c 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

turn out a judge better than that produced by the ordinary 
experience of life. The reason why this experience tells more 
with the old than with the young is simply that they have 
had more of it. At the present time*, in default of quality of 
training, they must rely on quantity alone. — The 7r/)eo-/3vTaToi9 
and 8l €fi7r€LpLav of 659 d 3 point in the same direction as the 
present passage. (H. Stephanus altered vv^' to vewi/, which 
is most unwarrantably translated by Ast : " {longe melius est) quam 
juvenum'^). For the connexion of eOos with TratSeia cp. Rep. 518 e 
(virtue is implanted) eOea-t Kal aa-K-qa-ecri, and 522 a WicTL TraLSevovcra 
Tovs cfivXaKas. 

e 6. These words remind us of 655 c8 Katroi Xeyova-iv ye kt\. 
We shall have to recur to both these passages at 668 a 9. 

659 a 1. Tov 8ia(p€povra : whereas those who were endowed 
and trained iKavcos were spoken of in the plural, as a class, the 
man with the special endowment and training is spoken of in the 
singular, as being rarer. There is no need to suppose that the 
author has here a special functionary in mind. — Sia ravra . . . 
on, "the reason why (I say this) is that . . ." 

a 4. The early vulgate Oarepov for Oedrpov is a typical mis- 
reading : Ficinus translates it " ab alio discere." 

a 5. Burnet was the first to put a comma after fxavdavovra. 
The Kat before eKTrXrjTTo/jievov does not connect this word with 
fjiavddvovTa — for this we should want ovre — but means both, 
though, strictly, either it ought to go before vtto Oopvf3ov, or there 
ought to be another participle with rrjs avrov aTratSevo-ias, in 
which case the vtto would have to be repeated. We may translate, 
" misled, as much by his own ignorance as by the noise made by 
the mob." The first ovre clause describes the case of the judge 
without <f)p6vr]crL<i, the second (ovt av ytyvtocTKovra ktX.) that of 
the judge who, "though he has insight" (yiyvwo-Kovra), gives the 
lie to his convictions, and his (sacred) profession, through cowardice. 
— For the 06pvf3os cp. Rep. 492 b. 

a 7. For the omission of e^ with ovirep cp. 770 b 5 izepl 
€Kd(TTii)v &v ridefxev tovs vo/xovs. Adam on Rep. 373 e calls it 
" the usual Greek idiom." 

b 1. xpevSo/xei'ov ktA., " be so irresolute as to give a vote 
which he knows to be false." 

b 4. Ficinus took rots with OearaU ; but, even though it is 
just conceivable that a7ro8tSorcrt might be used in the sense of 
" manifest, express by way of response " (to the poet's efforts), 
clearly here the people whom it is the judge's duty to oppose 

292 



NOTES TO BOOK 11 659 b 

{ivavTHiia-ofievos:) are the dramatic authors, who are spoken of as 
providing {rot^i aTroStSovo-t) the public with amusement. That 
dearah has no article is no more surprising than that ^earwv has 
none, two lines above. 

b 5. Unfortunately Eusebius, who quotes this passage, stops at 
d^arals. What follows in the MSS. cannot be right. Hermann, 
Schanz, and Burnet adopt Winckelmann's insertion of ov before 
KaOaTTcp. Kitter will have none of the ov ; but then he has to 
translate Kadarrep by " wie umgekehrt." This is only putting in 
the negative in German, without putting it in in Greek. Even 
with the Greek negative the sentence is far from smooth ; we must 
make the negative mean, " the old Greek procedure did not admit 
of acting as the Sicilian and Italian does now, which " (does so and 
so). Badham would have us mark a considerable lacuna after the 
word vo/xo?. I would suggest another way out of the difficulty, 
which is, to eject the words e^yjv yap 8rj t(^ TraAaio) re Kal ^FiXXrj- 
VLK(^ vofxo), as being a marginal scholium, which has been wrongly 
incorporated with the text. The sentence Kaddivep ktX. follows 
naturally after rois . . . /xr) . . . opOojs aTroStSovcrL : it is a 
concrete instance of what these words describe. I have therefore 
ventured to bracket these words and put a colon after Oearais. 

b 7. kTrirpkiriav used absolutely — without a direct object — 
almost in the sense of "give way to " ; cp. 802 c 1 rais 8e r]^ovah 
Kol e7ri6vfJiLaL<5 pi-q iTrir/DCTrovTa?. 

c 1 f . Twv Kptrwv : it should be remembered that these Kpirai 
are the mob : TratSevovo-tv in the next line is ironical, and Burnet 
is doubtless right in reading avrovs with A — the spectators actually 
educate (!) the poets. (As Schanz reads avrovs without comment, 
I conclude he thought the breathing in A was a rough one.) 

C 5. avTOis 8po)(Ti, "through their own action" — as we should 
put it, " and they have themselves to thank for it.'" A and read 
av Tois. Modern editors rightly follow Vat. 1 029 in reading avroU. 
Cornarius sees too much in avrot's Spioa-L when he translates, 
" quum ipsi poemata faciant" Ficinus has nunc Us ex theatro 
contrarium accidit. This looks as if he read rots S/owcrtv, and took 
it to mean " owing to the actors." The ordinary contrast between 
hpSiv and Tra(r\eiv gives a flavour of antithesis to the sentence ; it 
is almost equal to avrol Spiovres 7racr)(ovo-t. (Badham's av oh 
S/aokrt is less pointed.) — ~av rovvavriov : i.e. they see plays with 
morals worse than their own, and come to take pleasure 
increasingly in what is wrong and bad, and their taste, instead 
of being elevated, is corrupted. 

293 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 9. rptrov i) reraprov : the most explicit previous statement 
of this doctrine was that at 653 b. It was almost as clearly laid 
down in 645 a — tyjv tov XoyLafiov ayoyyrjv y^pvcrrjv Kal Updv, rr}? 
TToAews Kotvov vofiov eTTLKaXovfjievr^v — and it was no doubt in the 
author's mind when he wrote 643 e and 656 b. If then education 
is the process of drawing and leading the youthful mind in the 
direction in which the Law says it ought to go, we see, 
incidentally, what sort of claim the subject of Education has to 
fill a large place in a treatise on Laws. The framer of laws, 
that is, must consider the possibilities of education — must know 
the nature of the process, and the capacities of its subject matter ; 
and further, the most important branch of Law itself will be that 
which provides for, and regulates the educating process. See 
note on 671 a 4-672 d. 

d 3. €7rt€tK€crTaTois KoX Trpea/SvTOLTOis : in these words we 
have over again the insistence on both (1) <f)v<TLS, natural endow- 
ment, and (2) experience, as a necessity for right opinion. The 
second point is further reinforced by the addition of the words 
6i' €fx7r€LpLav. The same two influences were referred to in 655 d 8 
in the words rj Kara (fivcriv -^ Kara Wos. 

d 5. kdi^r^Tai : we are reminded by this word of the 6pdQ>s 
eWicrdaL vtto tcov TrpocrrjKovTOiv of 653 b 5. 

d 6. roLS VTTO TOV vofxov TrcTretcr/xevots (masc.) would apply not 
merely to the " second class " of cfiv\aK€<i vofxiov spoken of at 
632 c, but to all rightly educated adults with whom the young 
came in contact. It is, however, only 6 yepcov (d 7) who is referred 
to as an authority on the question of what is right and wrong. 
Eusebius, in quoting this passage, has Te^et/^evois (neut.) for 
7r€7reicr/xeyots, a disquieting variant — due perhaps to an imperfect 
memory. 

e 1. The TovTO)v ev€Ka resumes the tVa of d 4, and introduces 
the main sentence avTat (ai cpSal) Sokovctl (supplied from 8ok€l in 
c 9) €7ro>8ai yeyovevai, a sentence which is inordinately long, and 
almost smothered in relative and other clauses. — 6vt(x>^ fxev 
€7ra)Sai : Plato never scorns to point his argument by a pun ; he 
seems to think the spirit of the language inspires the Aoyos on 
such an occasion. — For this application of the notion cf. cTra^eii^ at 
Phaedo 114 d. 

e 2. vvv : if this is right, it must mean "under our present 
system." Stallbaum thought it might be an error for yjfxiv. 

e 3. crviJi(f)iovLav : cp. above 653 b 6 avTT] 'crd' rj o-v/x^wvta ktX. 
— a-7rov87]v : this again is partly a quibble. The (tttovS/j which 

294 



NOTES TO BOOK II 659 e 

the young eschew is not exactly the (tttovStJ which the cTrwSat are 
supposed to feel (eo-TrovSao-yuei/at). Tlie latter is a serious intention^ 
the former merely work, as opposed to play. 

e 5. KaXeicrdaL koX irpdrT^crBaL : I think TrpctTreo-^at means 
that the performance is regarded by tlie children tliemselves as a 
TraiSta, not merely that it is so treated by their teachers ; i.e. 
" not only do people call it playing and singing, but the children 
do it as if they thought it such " — they know nothing of its having 
a magical or medicinal effect upon them. This last idea — for 
charms and incantations were used against disease as well as 
against disinclination (cp. Euthyd. 290 a) — suggests the following 
analogy from nursery therapeutics. — rots Ka/xvovcrLv re Kal dadevuis 
Lorxova-Lv : the iraiSoiv of d 1, the Tiov veoiv of e 4, and the TratSo? 
of d 5 justify us in supposing that he is still talking only of 
children here. Besides, the nature, especially of the second 
process, is that of one more often applied to children than to 
adults. 

660 a* 1- ots fxeXeL TovTwv : i.e. doctors, or nurses, tovtwv 
is best taken as neuter, " these matters " ; if it is masc. it would not 
mean " the children " — that would be avTwv — but rots Kafjivova-Lv, 
which would then be " sick people " generally. 

a 2. Tojv TTovrjpoiv : for the gen. where we expect the adj. 
TTovrjpdv cp. T70VT]pLa<i cr)(^rjp.a(riv at 656 a 8. — €v arySecriv : one would 
imagine this to be a vague reminiscence of the practice of putting 
mustard on a child's thumb to prevent its being sucked. If Greek 
mothers went so far as to try to make all un-nourishing food 
unpalatable, there was more educational science in a Greek nursery 
than in a modern one. 

a 3. TavTov is adverbial ; cp. Polit. 308 e ravrov St] fiot rovO' 
1] /SacTiXiKr} cf)aLV€Tai . . . ovk iinTpexpcLV. 

a 4. €v Tot? Ka\oi<s p-qpiacTL kol cTraiveTot? : these words are 
difficult; I think they mean, "with the help of that jDeautiful 
and choice language of his." The poet is compared to the doctor 
or nurse in the preceding simile, the poet's " beautiful language " to 
the appetizing medium, and the XPl^^l Tpocp-ij is here represented 
by crx>]ixaTa and pikXr] which harmonize with and suggest cruxfipo- 
crvvrj^ dv8p€La and all kinds of virtue. The preposition iv is 
doubtless chosen to preserve the idea suggested by eV rjSecTL 
Ticrlv (TtTiots, but it here has what we may call its instrumental use, 
cp. below 680 d 8, 928 d 6, Phaedo 95 d 4, llieaet. 206 a 6. His 
fine language is to be a recommendation of the " virtuous " crx'j p^o-Ta 
Ktti fxcXr] which he is bound to "produce." (Hug wanted to reject 

295 



66oa THE LAWS OF PLATO 

€1/ . . . €7ratveT0ts, Though this would get rid of a difficulty, it 
would rob the comparison of an important feature.) 

a 5. TO. t(j3v o-M(fip6vo)v : cp. above 655 b. Here we have the 
same definition of what is KaXov in art. 

b 1. wpos Atds, "Bless you !" — vvv^ "at the present time." 

b 2. TToteiv is doubtless here used in the special sense in which it 
was used in a 7 and 8. 

b 7. KOi Kara ravra : these words, which Plato often uses 
before wo-aiJTws, merely round off the phrase, and reinforce twv 
avTwv : — " the same, and of the same nature." 

C 3. I think Burnet is right in omitting the comma after 
davfxd^oifXL (most editors have it). Thus read, the sentence 
ovK av Oavfx. ktX. will mean, " I expect it was through my not 
expressing my meaning clearly that — to my cost (ewaOov) — I did 
so " ; i.e. " that I created, and suffered from, a false impression " 
(so Ficinus). 

c 4. aA.A' a fSovXojxai ktX. : i.e. "instead of speaking clearly 
(and abusing things as they are), I gave you a general sketch of 
what I ivish to be, in the matter of fiovo-LKTj, in such a way, 
perhaps, as to make you think that that (ravra) was what I 
meant " ; then (as a reason why he did not find fault with the 
actual state of things) " because, though it is sometimes necessary 
to rail at hopeless and hardened sinners, such railing is not at all 
a pleasant task " — lit. " things past cure, and far advanced on the 
wrong road." — The emphatic e/xe in c 6 seems to be merely due to 
the fact that a av Aeyet? had come before. The ravra is, by its 
position, also emphatic. 

d 1 and 3. ravra and roiavra are a 8tavoov/xat and a f^ovXofiai 
ytyvea-Oai Trepl jxovcTLKrjv respectively. 

d 6. Both ovrw? and KaOd-n-ep vvv yiyverai go with ytyvofxeva, 
just as both the KaOdirep clauses in the next three lines go with 
ytyvoiro. 

d 8. TToXv TTov ro Sta^e/Dov : cp. above 654 d 4. Here the verb 
to be applied is av etr;. 

d 9. en, *' furthermore." 

d 11. <f)€pe Syy, (TvvoixoXoyqa- lapsed a ra vvv^ "now then for a 
settlement of the question." — Cleinias's remarks at b 1 ft", showed 
that he was thinking of the form and style of ixovcriK-q : here the 
Ath. rather suddenly directs our sole attention to the subject 
matter of the poet's work, ra Aeyo/xeva. He was entitled to do so 
by the admission by his hearers of the principle enunciated at 
655 b, that KaXov in plover iK-q means dperrjs k\6pLevov, but no 

296 



NOTES TO BOOK II / 66o d 

.doubt his hearers were somewhat bewildered, as Cleinias's answer 
(on 661 d) shows. The Athenian is here pursuing, in a* concrete 
instance, the same inquiry which he makes in general in Bk. I. : 
i.e. are the Cretan and Spartan institutions, though they may teacli 
us much, as satisfactory as they claim to be ? 

e 1. 7rai6ei^ Kal ixovatKyj is a hendiadys. This identification is 
also based on a previous admission (654 a 5 ff.). 

e 5. Kivvpa T€ Kal MiSa : Tyrtaeus (12. 6) has the Ionic forms 
of the gen. — TrXovroirj Bk MtSew kol K.Lvvp€0) fxaXiov. 

e 6. avtapw? ^rj, " lives a life of misery." dviapos is the natural 
opposite of rjSvs, Prot. 351 c, 355 e. 

e 7. €i7r€p op^ws Aeyet : the Athenian has asserted, with his 
hearer's assent, the legislator's right to dictate to the poet, and is 
thus enabled a second time to turn the tables on the Spartan 
national poet. "Whereas Tyrtaeus says : No amount of physical or 
temporal advantage counts for anything in a man who is not 
brave, the Ath. here lays it down that even bravery itself is just 
as woi'thless, if the possessor is aSiKo?. He even goes further, and 
says that it, like all other advantages, is a curse and not a blessing 
to a man if he is not virtuous. (Cp. 630 b 3 fF., and Gorg. 511 ff.) 

66l a 2 ff. The optatives roXp^to, vlkco, and ytyvoiro are, in form, 
the direct expression of the speaker's wish, but, as aSiKos Se oiv 
is directly contrasted with tolovtos wv, and the quotations from 
Tyrtaeus run on, we may suppose them to be, in effect, the reported 
expression of a wish ; i.e. " he must say, I would not have him 
steel his mind to face slaughter," etc. For a similar change from 
oblique to direct narration cp. Tim. 18 c purjxoiviopLevoL ottw? y^TySets 
TTore TO yeyevYjpevov avrw iSia yvcucrotro, vopaovac Se Trdvre^ 
irdvTas avTovs op-oyevets, and Gorg. 512 a Aoyt^erat . . . ort oiV, 
€1 p.€v Tts . . . piY) direTTViyr], ovtos p^kv dOXios icmv. 

b 1. For ex^crdai c. gen. in the sense of " depend on " cp. Prot. 
319 e 4 a pev StSacrKaAwv eixero, Meno 94 b 6 ocra rk\vr)/i e'xcTat. 

b 2. TO TeAo9, " the crown." 

b 5. All this is an emphatic restatement of what was said at 
631b 7 ff. 

c 1. TO TrapdTvav, "in general," because "life" is the most 
general expression of all physical activity — of which the particular 
senses j ust mentioned are kinds. 

C 1 ff. Tov . . . ovra is the subject to ^rjv. — p^kytcTTov p.\v KaKov 
. . . cAttTTov 8e : i.e. the possession of immortality would only 
prolong — and so multiply — the misery infinitely ; while a speedy 
death would shorten, and so lessen it 

297 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 5. eTTi^MLT] A (t in ras.), €7rt{wcr7; Eus. (ace. to Burnet). Ast 
boldly emends to €7rL(fj ; Stallb. and tlie Ziiricli edd. retain the 
impossible vulgate ^ttl^mtj ; Schanz writes cTri^wv y, and Burnet 
kiri^uirj (which L. & S." s.v. eTTL^do) — presumably as a misprint — 
gives as the vulgate here). I have, with some hesitation, preferred 
Schanz's emendation to Burnet's. The poetical form seems less 
likely to have been written by Plato here than the participial 
periphrasis (cp. e.g. elvat yLyvofievov in e 2) ; also the rasura in A 
is not so easily accounted for on Burnet's hypothesis. At the 
same time, the rasura apart, evrt^wr;, written originally with no i 
in the last syllable, would be naturally written kiri^ia-q by a careless 
scribe. 

C 6. TroL-qaeTe MSS., TreicreTe Eus. 

C 7. dTToStSovraSy " furnish," as at 659 b 5. 

c 8. I have followed Schanz in putting only a colon after 
opdre. 

d 1. KaXd A, KaKd 0, Eus., Iambi., and a late hand in the 
margin of A. — This emphatic (cra^ws) restatement of the main 
point — and explanation of ravra aTrep iyco — is made by the 
Athenian because it is just of this that he expects it will be 
hardest to convince his hearers. 

d 3. oVe^ ovv rjpofjirjv : these words refer directly to the 
question rj yap ; in c 8, and indirectly to the (Tvvop.oXoyricru)p.^6a 
at the beginning of the paragraph ; but they do not compel us to 
take ravra . . . rj/xiov as a question, as the first printed editions 
did — reading the fut. 

d 7. Sid reXovs : i.e. all three advantages are to be supposed to 
be lasting. — v/jllv : ethic dat, " if you like." lamblichus, in his 
quotation of the passage, omits it. 

d 7 flf. Ktti ert TrpocrriOrjfXL KrX. : I think Trpoa-riBrjfXL does not 
govern the following accusatives, and that eivat is not predicative 
to Aeyo/xevcov, but that the accusatives are the subjects to ytyvo/xevov 
elvai^ which stands for yiyvecrOai — yiyvofxevov agreeing naturally 
with the last ace. — /xySev dXXo : /xrjSh (not ovSev) because the 
sentence is, in effect, conditional — perhaps too the fact that it is 
the subject to an infin. {elvai) had something to do with the choice 
of p.r)8ev. — To those who prefer to take eti/at with twv Xeyo fjLcvMV 
I would still urge that it is best to take ytyvofxevov with all the 
accusatives : " I don't mind adding, if you like, that he has pre- 
eminent strength and courage, with immortality to boot, and more- 
over none of the so-called evils." Then the construction is changed, 
and we go back to the ace. e'xovra, which is parallel to k€ktt7/x€vov 

298 



NOTES TO BOOK II 66l d 

ill d 6. The resuming toi^ ovtio ^wpra seems to admit a previous 
conversational irregularity. At the same time the /xrjSev akXo 
and the fjiovov support each other so closely that I do not think 
we ought, with Burnet, to mark off kol ctl . . . ytyvojxevov with 
dashes as a parenthesis. Still less do I see any reason for follow- 
ing Schanz in rejecting kol fxr^Sev . . . y lyvo fxevov. 

e 4. Stallbaum is not right in saying ^^ pertinet ovk ad solum 
evSuLfMova." If we had, e.g., 7r€7reto-/xat, instead of ov Trecdio vfxas, 
as the main verb, it would be followed by firj evSaifxova aAA' 
adXiov ycyveo'dai. The ovk is added to the /x-q in the sentence 
as we have it, because the main verb rreidio has a neg. with it. 
Hence it is the [x/j, not the ovk, which negatives ev8at/xova. 

e 6. Tt ovv . . . )(/oewi/ ; " what must be our next step ? *' 

662 a 3. al(TXpio<s : the words previously used are aOXios and 
dvcapios ; from Cleinias's present point of view a yStos may be 
aicrxpos, and yet not aOkuos {KaKos has something of both). We 
are thus introduced to the subject discussed at Gorg. 474 eff. and 
mentioned at Eep. 392 b. 

a 5. TO KOL Kakws ; i.e. " and will you agree to the words ' and 
evilly'?" 

b 1. oTTws ; " how, ask you ? " — The ws eotxev shows that 
€t SoLTj is not a wish, but the protasis to a suppressed apodosis 
avy\a}poifX€v av. 

b 2. u)<> vvv ye ktX. " (an agreement as complete) as our present 
discord appears to be " — a pregnant use of ws. (I think this is 
better than to take ws as simply = yo.p.) 

b 3. ovTU)<s dvayKaia, cos ovSe, , . . KpyJT7) vrjaos (ra^ws, " a 
conclusion so irrefutable that it is not so clear that Crete is an 
island" — another pregnant use of ws, similar to that at Eur. I.T. 
1180 (ro(fi-qv CT Wpexpev EAAa?, (us rjcrdov /caAws. In the latter 
passage ws = on ovtcos : here it is equal to wcrre ovt<os- Cp. also 
Soph. O.T. 345. I think that €(tti, rather than (as St.) ^atverat, 
is to be supplied with KprjTrj vrjcros. 

b 7. (OS : this conjunction does duty for two sentences, which are 
connected by rj. 

C 3. Trapd depends on 8id(f>opa ; cf. Phaedo 74 a rrapa ravra 
TravTa 'irepov tl. St. cps, the Trapd with aAAa (^ Trapd Tavra 
^Xofxev aAAa 8Lavor]dyjvaL ; Phil. 21 d). I can find no other 
example of 8id(f)opo<s with Trapd, though it seems a natural 
construction. At Tim. 63 e we have Stdcfiopa tt/oos aAAi^Aa, and 
SiacfiipeLv and the noun Siatfiopd are also found with Trp6<i (Phil. 
47 d ^vx^s Trpos (rcSyaa Siaffiepofxev-qs, Laws 928 d 5 8ta^opaX 

299 



662 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

7raT€po)v T€ Trpbs avrutv TratSas, Phaedr. 231 b ras tt/do? tov<s 
TTpocnJKovTa<i Siacj^opd's). Probably 8ta<^o/3os (ktX.) tt^oos nva 
corresponds to Stdcfiopos tlvl^ and Stdcfiopos Trapd nva to Stdcfiopos 

C 7. For vo/xo^eT7ycravTa? cp. above 624 a 4 and 5. 

d 2. et 8q, " suppose, for the sake of argument," like the ei fxev 
8-q at d 6, implying that the Ath. does not think for a moment 
that Zeus and Apollo would give such an answer. 

d 3. €L7r€p 6p6oj<i i7ravepij)T(^/x€v : there is a suspicion of ostenta- 
tion in these words — it is almost as if the Ath. flourished a piece 
of logic in the face of his unsophisticated audience. (So Touch- 
stone discourses of "philosophy," and a "figure of rhetoric" to 
Corin or William.) Anyhow it is not easy to see why the next 
question is the "correct" sequel to the last. 

d 4. The word evSat/jioyv brings in a fresh notion. It means 
not simply happy — which would be much the same as rjSvs — but 
blessed of heaven. Cp. Rep. 354 a aA,Aa firjv 6 ye ev ^c3v p.aKdpi6s 
T€ Kal evSaifjuov, where Adam quotes Aristotle's elegy on Plato : 
ISpva-aro fSiofxov dv8p6s, ov ov8' alvetv rolcn KaKolcn OejJLLS ' os /xoi/os 
rj TT/awTos OvrjTiov KareSet^ev evapyds olk€l(j) re jSico Kal jJL€$68oi(Ti 
Xoyiov, o)s dyados re Kal ev8aL/xci)v d/xa ytveraL dvrjp. At Meno 
78 a Socrates adds KaKo8at/>iwv (a word of colloquial abuse — " God- 
forsaken" as E. S. Thompson says) to ddXtos, as if the one notion 
involved the other. It would therefore be more than droirov if 
the Gods made the answer supposed at d 6. As the two Gods are 
the original lawgivers for Sparta and Crete, the Ath.'s hearers are 
bound to agree here. 

d 6. aroTTO? avTMv 6 Aoyos dv ytyvoiTO, " their reasoning would 
become absurd." 

d 7. fiovkofxaL Se /zot /xrj eirl Oeojv XeyecrOat to tolovtov, " I 
should not like to see such a saying put into the mouth of 
a God " ; lit. " to be said in the case of a God." For this use 
of cTTt c. gen. with Xeyetv cp. Rep. 475 a eir efxov Aeyetv, 524: e 
iiicnrep errl tov 8aKTvXov eXeyofxev, Gorg. 453 e el eirl twv avrcov 
Te>(i/wv Xeyofxev Syvirep vvv8yj, Laws 793 e oirep eirl riov 8ovX(dv 
eXeyofjLev, Charm. 155 d ctti KaXov \ey(DV 7ratSo9. 

e 2 ff. rjpoiryjorOo), " let (the question) be supposed to have been 
put to " ; and perhaps too 6 8' ciTrerw is, " and let him be supposed 
to answer." — jjLaKdpLo<i is here used as synonymous with ev8aLiJbu>v. 
We have the same /mot with yp. that we had with Xeyea-dai, and 
that is one reason why I think Schanz is wrong in altering 
y]p(j)T-q<j6o) into -qpoiTrjcrdaL : there would then be too great 

300 



NOTES TO BOOK II 662 e 

uniformity between the two clatises. For a similar pair of 
accusatives, coupled with the figura etymologica, cp. Laws 705 c 
IJ,LfMT^(r€L<s TTovTjpas fXLfxcLcrOat Tovs TToXefjLiovs ; the only difference 
here is that the verb is passive. (The Cod. Voss. — in marg. — 
put in irpos before Trarc/oa, and Ast actually prints Trari/jp re kol 
vop.o6kTri<i with no MS. authority, and St. approves.) — The 
pregnant use of the perf. iniperat. — not merely " let the question 
have been put," but "grant," or "suppose that the question has 
been put" — is quite idiomatic; cp. 9 524 /xvOo^ 8' o<s fxlv vvv 
vyLT]<s, €tpi]fj.€vos ecrro), Crat. 401 d kol Tuvra pkv Srj ravTy (hs Trapa 
/X7/86V ilSoTMV elp'qa-Oix). 

e 5. dX\\ " and yet." 

e 6 — 663 a 7. ravry pXv ovv ktX. " well, the lawgiver — or 
father — who decides this way " (i.e. that the ■vySto-ro? yStos is 
fiaKapuoraTos) " would, I think, appear absurdly at a loss to give 
a consistent answer. If, on the other hand, he declared the 
perfectly just life to be perfectly blessed, anyone who heard him 
would, I think, inquire ' what was the advantage and merit in it, 
superior to pleasure, which the law found to recommend 1 ' Why, 
what advantage can the just man find which has tIo pleasure in it ? 
I ask you, is fair fame, and the praise of men and gods, an 
advantage and an honour which is wnpleasant, and an ill name 
the reverse ? My good lawgiver, we shall never admit that. 
Pray, is wronging nobody, and being wronged by nobody, unpleasant, 
though good and right, and is the other behaviour pleasant, 
though disgraceful and bad ? " — Tavrrj : I think, after much 
hesitation, that we ought to take this word with TtOepievos rather 
than with c^atvotro : (1) because rtOeixevos with a qualifying word 
is more naturally used than if taken absolutely ; i.e. " he who 
decides this way," rather than " the decider, the authority," or 
even " the deciding lawgiver," and (2) because there seems to be a 
decided antithesis between ravTy /xev ovv (6 t.) and et 8' av in 
e8. (I am not influenced by e.g. Crat. 398 c Tavrrj 8' ovv rcOefjiai 
ktX. because I think that there, as at Crat. 418 d 2, ravTy means 
" that is why.") 

e 7. aroTTos goes, I think, closely with aTropos ; not " would 
look foolish and . . . ," but "would appear strangely at a loss 
to . . ." Cp. Ep. 333 c 6 Kttt fxdXa aroTrw kol al(T\pa vlk-tj, " and 
that by a remarkably disgraceful victory" — (cp. our "nice and 
warm"). — The gen. tov a-v/xcfi. eavrw Aeyeti/ depends on the a- 
privative in d7ropo<s. 

663 a 1. 6 vofios : this personification of vofios is peculiar, but 

301 



663 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

intelligible ; 6 v6[jlos represents the same point of view as 6 vofxo- 
OeTTjs. TO StKatov is what the law enjoys, and consequently the 
law is held responsible for the effects of just action. Schanz 
adopts Badham's substitution of vojjLoderrjs for v6/jlo<s here, and I 
am strongly disposed to follow his example. If v6/xos be retained, 
it must anyhow be regarded as a conscious substitution for vofxo- 
derrj'i, denoting the same " party " in the argument. 

a 2. TL yap 8r] StKaup ;>(a)/3i^o/xevov rjSovrjs dyadov : the argument 
is : For the just man to be evSat/jujiv must be an dyadov ; there is no 
dyaOov the just man can experience, which is ;(aj/)t^o/x€vov -^Sovrjs : 
therefore it must be wrong to think that to SiKatov and t6 rjSv can 
be separated, or that the lives spoken of at 662 d 1 are two. 

a 6. fJi'qTc viro TLvos dSLKeurOaL : to complete the picture, from 
the point of view of law and lawgiver — i.e. of the community — 
the recipient of the wrong must be mentioned as well as the 
wrongdoer ; one involves the other. 

a 7. ■^ for Kat, possibly to show that no special distinction is 
here intended between dyaOov and KaXov ; possibly, only for 
variety's sake. — to, 8' eVe/aa, " the different state of things," where 
we should expect "the opposite state of things"; possibly, 
because Tavavria had just before been used adverbially. The con- 
text shows that it is the opposite state of things, which he here 
denotes by the milder expression. (Ast rejected -IJKLcrTa . . . 
KttKa. A Venetian MS. — Bekker's H — and the four earliest 
printed editions omitted -qKia-ra . . . dSiKeurdaL. Ficinus trans- 
lates the whole passage — giving it all, even Kat ttws, to the Ath. ; 
Cod. Voss. attributed r'jKLcrTa . . . dSiKetcrdaL (ace. to Ast and Stallb.) 
to Cleinias. (More probably Cod. Voss. gave him down to KaKo..) 

b 1. Kal dyaOov re Kat KaAov : I cannot help suspecting these 
words to be spurious. The identification of dyadov and KaXov is 
kindred to that of rj8v and SUaiov — is perhaps the identification of 
the generals of which the latter pair are particulars — but it is a 
separate point. It would need different arguments, and it is not 
used in the rest of the paragraph. The only defence the words 
seem to admit of is, that the whole of the paragraph appears to 
have been written in a less careful style than the preceding part of 
the argument. — d fitjSeu 'hepov : Ast is, I think, right in supplying 
7rp6<s in sense (before /xt^Scv) from the following clause ; i.e. not 
" will persuade, if nothing else can," but " will persuade to (this), 
if to nothing else." 

b 2. vo/xodeTY) ktX.j " in the lawgiver's eyes that reasoning is 
;most wicked and dangerous, which denies that this is the case" — 

302 



NOTES TO BOOK II 663 b 

i.e. which denies that to rjSv Kal to Slkulov are identical. — 
evavTiojTaTo? is lit. " most hostile " (to the lawgiver) — " his most 
deadly opponent." 

b 5. TrAeov, " in larger amount." 

b 6. I have ventured to alter o-KoroStvLav into cTKOToSivLav. 
The noun is used in a figurative sense, at 892 e and Soph. 264 c, for 
uncertainty, perplexity ; here we are told that " distance " — for so we 
may translate what literally means "what is seen at a distance" — 
" produces indistinctness of vision (in all, and especially in the 
inexperienced)." This indistinctness is directly afterwards denoted 
by the more general o-koto? (cp. Rep. 516 e, where the man, who is 
imagined as returning from sunlight to the cave, ctkotovs av 
dvoLTrXeoiS (rxotrj tov<s 6cfi6aXixov<i). 

b 7. The reading of A and is (vofioOerr]^) 8' el firj. The 8' turns 
all the rest of the paragraph into a protasis with no apodosis. L has 
ei fxr) (L 59. I. has 8c Tr)v in the margin). This €t fxr), which Burnet 
adopts, makes all the rest of the paragraph the protasis to (tkoto- 
8iVLav 7rap€\ei. This satisfies grammar, but not sense and logic. 
The vofxoOeTrjs can doubtless remove the crKOToStvta by treatment, 
but who could say "distance produces indistinctness unless the 
vofxoBkTiqq removes it by treatment " ? If he removes it, it must 
have been there, and consequently must have been produced. 
With this reading we should have to supply, in sense, " and will 
continue to do so," after Trapk\(.L. Aid., and all editions up to 
Stallb. and the Ziirich editors, read 8' r^fxtv. Hermann (whom 
Schanz and Apelt p. 5 follow) corrects o' el jxtj to 8' oi/xat. This 
last correction seems more natural here, and to be imlaeographically 
at least as likely as 8' rj/xLv. el /xr] looks like a correction of 8' el 
fxr] ; i.e. the 5' was more likely to be omitted on purpose than 
put in. 

b 8. et's TovvavTiov tovtov : another slipshod phrase, like ovtcos 
ex^iv at b 4 ; apparently it means " into the opposite of what it was 
at first." 

C 1. Kal TTela-ei ktX. : what follows is either still more slipshod 
in expression than the former part of the paragraph, or corrupt. 
If the latter, the corruption is so far uncured, if not incurable. 
If the former is the true account, we may perhaps adopt St.'s 
explanation that tw tov 8iKaiov is the dat. of to tou StKatov, a 
paraphrase for to 8iKaLov. Apparently the vop,oOeTr]<i is, by his 
course of training — in which he relies on the formation of habit 
{edea-L), fortified by praise (cTratVots), and reasoning (Aoyots) — 
to make his charges believe (1) that it is an artificial picture 

303 



663 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(cTKLaypdcfirjfxa) of right and wrong tliat they have been looking 
at, and (2) that, like other pictures, it only produces the illusion 
intended, if seen from a certain point. Here the illustration 
would join up with the to iroppiaOev bpuijxevov one. The man 
who has had a training in just action would have been brought 
near to justice, and would therefore discern the faults of the 
picture which looked all right when he was far off from it. 

C 2. Naber's xfoyoLS for Aoyois (adopted by Schanz) seems 
wrong ; the following representation of the case (ws icrKtayp. kt\.) 
would need Aoyot to explain it. 

c 3 ff. I have removed the comma from after ^atvo/xei/a, put 
commas before and after rw rov SiKaiov evavrtcos, and after 
6e(Dpovfxeva, and would translate ws kcrKtayp. . . . dfK^orepa, 
" That the right and wrong he sees is like a rough picture — 
the wrong, which behaves in the opposite way to the right, 
appearing, when seen by him when he is in a wrong and bad 
state, pleasant, and the right most unpleasant ; while, when they 
are seen by him when he is in a state of righteousness, every 
man sees both sides altogether in the opposite light." If the 
eavTov of the MSS. is right, we must suppose an imaginary pupil 
of the lawgiver to be spoken of. In that case Travri in c 5 is 
irregular, and TravTy recorded (or suggested) by a late hand in 
the margin of A is preferable ; but if Ast (applauded by St., and 
followed by Schanz) is right in reading avTov for lai»Toi}, iravrl is 
quite in order. — Badham proposed koI rdSiKa for Kal dScKa (the 
omission to repeat the article is hardly noticeable among so many 
irregularities of expression) — and to eject the words to, /xev dScKa 
ra Tov SiKaiov, inserting rd fxev dSiKa after OeiDpov/neva, and 
rejecting tt/jos in c 5. — F.H.D. would reject tw tov StKaiov. 
Schanz marks a lacuna before evavTcuts. Stephanus (and C. 
Ritter) recommend the rejection of the no before tov SiKatov — 
governing the gen. by evavrtws. — For the use of €k in c 3 and 4 
St. well cps. Soph. 236 b to (patvofxevov fxev Sid Trjv ovk Ik KaXov 
Oeav eoLKevat tco /caAa, where the effect is the opposite of that 
described in the present case. — The /xh before dStKa corresponds 
in logic to the 8e in to, Se St/caia, and the /xev before dSiKov to 
the 8e in Ik 8e ScKatov. — rjSea is predicate to cfyatvofieva, not to 
Oeoipovfxeva. Among the suggested alterations of the passage that 
of Madvig seems to me the best ; he supposes evavTiiw to have 
fallen out before li/avTtws. We thus get a clumsy chain of 
participles, but greater clearness. I should still, if this were 
adopted, put a comma after 6e(opovfjL€va. — A somewhat similar 

304 



NOTES TO BOOK II 663 c 

philosophizing is to be seen in Euripides, Ijph. in Aul. 387 
TTOVijpov (f>ii)TO'S '))8ovai KaKat. 

C 7 f . The question arises : with what do T'qv, irorkpav and rriv 
in the next line agree ? In grammar it is aAry^etav, but the 
meaning of this word coalesces with that of its dependent gen. 
KpLcreo)^ to mean " true judgement," or rather " claim to truth." 
What the sentence means is, " which claim to be true has the 
higher authority ? " 

d 5-e 2. As Cleinias's form of assent shows a disposition to go 
behind the argument, the Ath. reinforces it by considerations of 
expediency. He is careful, by the extremely hypothetical form 
of the question, to guard against the idea that he himself for a 
moment doubts the reality of his previous conclusion. He does 
not say, " if it were otherwise, what better opportunity for a 
useful lie could a legislator haveV but, "if it had been 
otherwise," and '■'■have had" (Voltaire's "il faudrait I'in venter" 
is in a less hypothetical form.) It is almost as if Plato argued : 
" Does' it not look as if it must be true, because it is such a useful 
thing to be able to say ? " — ov n Kal arfjuKpov ocfieXos : we have 
already met this phrase at 630 c and 647 a in connexion with the 
vop.o6kry]S ', cp. also 890 d tov ye a^tov kol crfiLKpov vop.odir7]v. 

d 7. ws Kol vvv avTo ypyjx' o Xoyos ex^tv : cf. Farm. 141 d 
MS ye 6 \6yos at/aet, Phil. 35 d ovSafxy 6 Aoyos alpet^ Rep. 604 c 
oirrj 6 Xoyos alpei ^cAtictt' av e;(etv. alpelv seems in this phrase 
to be used much as we say, in an argument, " there you have me." 

e 1. Schanz adopts H. Stephanus's insertion of TreWeiv before 
TToieiv : this insertion was independently suggested by Badham. 
At 671c 4 Swafxevovs has just as much need of a supplied inf. 
The difference is that there the sentence is long, and a Troietv 
which occurs near the end sounds as if it might be the missing 
inf., though it is not. I am inclined to believe in a pregnant use 
of 8-vvaa6ai in the sense of " to be equal to bringing it about 
that" (cp. Ast, Lex.), akin to its meaning of "to signify," "to be 
equal to " ; TreiOeiv Trotetv would sound very awkward. 

e 2. Travras, which is in no MS., has been, by most editors, 
added to the text from Eusebius's quotation of the passage. 

e 3 ff. The most various interpretations have been proposed of 
Cleinias's remark, and the Athenian's answer. The difference 
arises from the various suhaudienda imagined before or after 
Cleinias's remark ; e.g. (before it) " it would certainly be better 
if we could do without a lie " (C. Bitter) ; (after) " id quod verum 
esse putamus difficile est (nobis) persuadere {non ita esse) " Ast. 

VOL. I 305 X 



663 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Both these cannot be right ; I think no suhaudienda are needed. 
The author is directly calling attention to the plastic nature of 
the youthful mind, and incidentally suggesting a correct aj^precia- 
tion of myths and their position in education. In the previous 
paragraph the Athenian's language, in referring to the possible use 
of a lie, is carefully chosen — ctt' ayaSi^ xpevSecrdaL wpos tovs 
veovs — he calls it XvcnreXeSj and an efficient prompter of a good 
disposition. This is because he wants to point out the use of 
stories in forming the mind. Cleinias does not see what he is 
driving at, and takes refuge in the following safe and somewhat 
trite remark : " truth " (i.e. philosophical truth) *• is a treasure, 
and an abiding one ; but the process of getting it into people's 
minds is evidently a hard one." In the Athenian's answer I have 
ventured to read to /xei/rot ^tSwi/tov for to fxkv tov StSwviov. 
It is not likely that Plato should have spoken of the story as told 
by a Sidonian (and that is the most natural translation of the 
gen.), and a comparison of Rep. 414 c suggests that to 2i5(oi/tov 
fxvOoXoyiqfxa is only a variety for the proverbial i/'eGSo? or xpevcrfxa 
^OLVtKLKov (see Photius s.v. ^olvlkikov). For to /xei'Tot = to 8c 
cp. Phaedrus 228 d tyjv fxevroi Sidvocav. What the Athenian says 
there is : "I graiit you ; but it is not hard to get a cock-and-bull 
story like the Sidonian one into people's minds." (I think Burnet 
is wrong in reading the words as a question. A question should 
have had ov pddLov, and if it had been a question, it would natur- 
ally have been repeated after Cleinias 's irola;) — The Ath. seizes on the 
word TTct^eti/ as opening up the general subject of the way in which 
the young mind can and ought to be furnished with ideas and 
feelings. Of course the Cretan goes off mentally in the direction 
suggested, and asks Trola ; He has been in a fog, and he sees a 
chance of getting into clearer air. 

e 6. kykvero may fairly be taken as a gnomic aorist ; the 
addition of K-at dXXa /xvpia looks as if no definite accrediting of a 
particular story was referred to. 

e 9. TrapdScLyixa tov Treicreiv, " proof that a man will (be able 
to) persuade." For TrapaSeiyfJia in the sense of "proof" or "con- 
firmation" cp. Laws 801 b 9, Thuc. i. 2. 6. 

664 a 2. avTov is the vo/jLoOeT-rj^ not the imaginary tis. — The 
substance of this paragraph is as follows : " the minds of the young 
are plastic. It is of the utmost importance that they should be 
moulded aright. They must be led to think that doing right is 
pleasanter than doing wrong. The songs they sing and hear, the 
stories that are told to them, the admonition of their elders, and 

306 



NOTES TO BOOK II 664 a 

the public opinion of tlie whole community must all point in this 
direction, and tend to induce this belief." His two hearers agree 
unconditionally that the Adyos is leading them aright. Cleinias's 
answer at 663 d 5, and his next remark, and the turn now taken 
by the Athenian's disquisition reveal to us that Plato in this 
dialogue is mainly writing, not for men who are able to follow 
8taX.€KTLKol Xoyoi but, for practical men, whose experience enables 
them to criticize from a practical standpoint, and, if necessary, to 
amend, the work of a voixo9kTr]<i. From time to time, however, 
through the Nd/xot, the author goes back, as one should say, to first 
principles, — and in a tone that shows us that it is in no sceptical 
spirit that he abandons the higher ground. 

a 4. 17 ToiavTr] crvvoLKLa Tracra ((fiOeyyoir' dec) : this paraphrase 
for TToAts, in this connexion — the universal voice of the community 
— is what we should call "public opinion." (I. Bruns p. 70 says 
the word roiavT-q proves that this passage, as first arranged, came 
after the proposal at the end of Bk. III. to legislate for a special 
colony.) — Schanz reads ovtlv av for the MS. ovnvd. Burnet, at 
Gorg. 492 b (where no MS. has dv, and only a late hand in the 
margin of B has rt), adopts Woolsey's tl dv (after Swaa-Tetav), but 
here, and at Euthyd. 296 e, he leaves the optative without dv. It 
is probable that the av has fallen out here — 'possible that Plato left 
the av out in his written text — either thinking that he had put it 
in, or with a vague notion that the av with kpydo-airo was enough. 
In either case I do not believe that he would have been other 
than grateful to any editor who put it in, — though he might have 
wished to have a say as to where it was to stand. 

a 6. The 8ta (itov Travrd?, which reinforces the act, foreshadows 
the arrangement, described in the two following speeches of the 
Athenian, for securing the aid of men of all ages. 

b 3. l/xbv av eir] Aeyetv : not merely "my (next) task must be 
to describe," but " I will take upon myself to describe " ; e/xdv is 
emphatic. So, more circumstantially, at 892 d fF., as already at 
631 a, and 641 e, the Athenian claims to lecture his audience 
sometimes, instead of discussing matters on an equality with 
them. 

b 4. CTraSetv : cp. 659 e 1 ovrw? fxkv cTrwSat rats \pvyai<s., and 
666 c 6. — rpets ovras : this is the first time three choruses are 
spoken of. We learn from Plut. Lycurg. ch. 2 1 that there were at 
Spartan festivals three choruses : Kara ra? T/)€tg r}At/<ia§ (rvvicTTd- 
/^€voi ... 6 fiev Tiov yep6i'T0)V . . . 6 Se tojv aK/xa^dvTwi/ . . . 
o §6 TpLToSj 6 Twv TTatScDv. That is, doubtless, why the Ath. refers 

307 



664 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

to the arrangement as already known. — Up to 666 d ff. Plato 
uses language about the class of citizens between thirty and sixty 
years of age which conceals from his interlocutors the fact that it 
is only in a figure that he describes them as a x^/oo? ; from 666 d 
onwards he unfolds to them that the /xovcra to which the mature 
minds among the citizens are to be devoted is " KaXX.LO)v rrjs riou 
)(^opMV Kal rrjs ev rots kolvols Oearpois" (667a). 

b 7. TO Se KecfiaXaiov avr(ov tovto €(tto) : so the MSS. avrwv 
seems not to refer to rot KaAa Travra which are to be the 
subject matter of the songs. If it does, the following clause is 
very irregularly expressed. Stallbaum would like to put a 
comma after X^yecrOac, and insert the words Koi tovto before 
(f)d(rKovT€s. The only way in which we can bring the passage 
into order as it stands is to suppose avrcuv to refer to the general 
arrangements about the choruses : " The main point to be kept 
before us in our proceedings in this," — I have ventured to read 
av for avTMV. 

b 8. I'TTo ^etov Xkyea-Qai : just as the citizens in general are 
to be told that the laws of the state w^ere given by a god, or by a 
divinely inspired man, so, to the young, the truths which only 
the experienced philosopher can discover are to be presented with 
the sanction of religion. 

C 1. It is, I think, admissible to suppose that aki^Oka-TaTa 
refers to the statement that the right and good life is the 
pleasantest, not to the statement that the gods say so ; whereas 
the ixaXXov Tretcrofxev . . . rj cav aAAcos ttws (pdeyywfJieOa 
XeyovTes refers merely to the appeal to the religious sanction. 

C 5. elcrioi : previous references to kopTai at 652 d and 657 d 
and the words Iv OeaTpo) at 665 e 5 make it clear that this word 
is here used in the technical sense of " coming on " to the stage at 
a public festal performance. 

C 6. aTrdcry cnrovSfj : i.e. it is to be no amateurish performance ; 
the choir must do its very best ; as indeed is to be expected, when 
all the city assembles to hear it. It is the choir of the Muses, 
who preside over education. (The occasion has some of the 
elements of the modern school speech-day.) — 6 p^expi^ TpiaKovTa 
cTwv : Plato does not here specify a date which is to divide 7rat8es 
from oLKfjid^ovTes ; probably because, for different purposes, and 
in different states, the date varied ; also, in some states the 
e(f)r]l3oL formed an intermediate class. 

C 7. Cp. Critias 108 c kol tov Tlatoivd re kol Movaas €7rt- 
KaXov/xevov, though there the divinity is only appealed to for 

308 



NOTES TO BOOK II 664 c 

inspiration, and not, as here, implored to produce conviction as 
well. The second chorus is evidently that of Apollo, 

C 8. T015 v€OLS : either all below the class of the aKfid^ovre^ — 
those, i.e., still undergoing the process of education — or perhaps 
ol v€OL includes the aK/xd^ovres as well — as being still impression- 
able. The words iXewv /xera ttclOovs, "graciously pleased to 
convince," look more like a prayer for others than for the 
suppliants themselves. 

d 1. As I think that the 8e in rovs 8e ixerd ravTa, and not 
the 8e after Set, marks the chief contrast to the /xei/ clause in c 4, 
I have put a colon, and not a full stop (as St. and Burnet) after 
i7r€V)(^6fX€vos — Schanz puts a comma there. The grammatical con- 
struction, it is true, indicates a greater break at e7rev;)(o/x€vo§, 
as both aSetv and KaraAeAetc^^at depend on Set, but logically 
the three choruses on the one hand, and the old men past "singing" 
on the other, are more opposed than the two first choruses and the 
rest of the population. 

d 2. Tovs fJierd ravra : this can mean nothing but " those who 
are beyond that age " ; but it is an unusual expression, as also is 
<^€/3eiv, in the next line, which a comparison of 665 d 9 — ttols ttov 
yiyvofxevos tt peer (^vr epos okvov irpos rots w8a? /xecrrds — would 
persuade us to translate "to support the toil of," an unusual 
extension of the sense of to endure (something evil). Is it possible 
that the word here means to contribute ?) cp. Polit. 298 a irpoa- 
TOLTTovres dvaXiofiara <f>epeLv) — or even to produce ? 

d 3. /xvOoXoyovs irepl twv aTJTwv 'qO<x>v, " to tell stories about 
the same characters " ; i.e. about men who display virtuous 
dispositions. 

d 4. Sia Oeias <f)i^ixrjs : i.e. of an inspired character, cp. 624 b 2. 

d 8. That is, we are now going to see what is the second and 
chief use of fieOi) — that referred to beforehand at 653 a as a means 
of safe-guarding education. Its- first use — that of enabling the 
educators to judge character — to KaTiSetv ttws eyoixev rots (pvaeis 
— (to) i/'i'x^s fSdcravov ka/ji/Sdveiv — and to train the young in 
a 18(65 and ala-xvvT] — had been explained already at the end of 
Bk. I. The forgetfulness of his hearers provides the Ath. with 
the occasion for a useful repetition. 

Inasmuch as the explanations which follow all apply to the 
participation of mature and elderly men in the chorus of 
Dionysus, Orelli's rpcTTovs for rptrovs (in d 6) is inadmissible — 
besides, there could have been nothing about the first two 
choruses which would seem strange to his hearers ; it was only 

309 



664 d /^^^ LAAVS OF PLATO 

about the third that they needed further information. Possibly 
it was the recent occurrence of the word rpiTovs in d 1 which 
made him choose the plural here. We get the sing, again at 
665 b 1. 

e 3. Kar dpxas rtov Aoywv : i.e. at 653 df. Here ol Xoyoi 
means the discussion begun in this book ; and so probably above, 
at d9. 

e 7. TovTwv djji<fiOT€p(j}v : i.e. of bodily movement, and of voice ; 
this gen. depends on rd^eios, and that on aLa-Oi-jcnv. This ace. 
should itself have been in the gen., as governed by the nearer 
verb €cf)d7rT0LT0, but, to avoid three genitives, one on the back of 
another, it is made to be governed by e'xot, even though it is 
duplicated by the following tovto : — an instructive instance of 
Plato's sentence-construction, and treatment of cases. (Burnet 
has made this construction much clearer by putting a comma after 
djjLcf>oT€pii)v. Stallb. commends, and Sclianz adopts Winckelmann's 
ala-O-ja-ei for aia-Orjo-Lv (cp. Phaedo 65 d, and Phil. 35 a). Badham 
suggests the same change (comjmring tw vco ecfidrrTecrOaL tcov 
ovTwv), and places the word after ovSev. But a comparison of 
653 e 3 — rd p,\v ovv dXXa {'wa ovk €)(^€lv ata-6rj(Tiv t(ov €V rats 
KLvqa-ecrtu ra^ewv ov8e dra^cwv — makes it very hard to explain 
€\oi TOVTO here as meaning anything but exot ra^ews aia-OrjariVy 
and if the c^oc clause was in the writer's mind at the beginning of 
the sentence, the slight anacoluthon involved in aLo-Or^criv . . . 
ecjid-TTTOLTo is easily explained — especially when there were so 
hiany genitives about.) — For the whole subject of the passage cp. 
Phil. 17 c ff. and above on 653 e 4. 

665 3' 2. A has d/)/>coi/ias, and so a second hand in 0; i.e. the 
writer of A cannot be trusted as perfect in grammar. Cp. Hdt. 
vi. 53 OVK eTreoTTi eTTiovvfiLT] Uepa-ei oi^Se/xta TraTpos Ovr^Tov, ilio-jTip 
'UpaKXei 'AfMcfiLTpviov ; if ever a Greek would have thought it 
right to say ovofxa 'ApL(fiLTpvovos, he would have done it in this 
sentence, one would think. 

a 8. It would have been more regular to repeat the 6 before 
Twv Mova-iov, but the pi. eLprjvTac makes it clear that two choruses 
are spoken of, and so the repetition — which would rather spoil 
the rhythm — is unnecessary. 

b 2. Xeyea-Oat, not " (has) to be spoken of," but " (must) be called 
(that of Dionysus)." 

b 3. fxdXa yap aroTTOs . . . Alovvotov Trpecr/SvTCov xop6<s : the 
Kcence which Cleinias associates with the name of Dionysus seems 
to accord ill with old age. In spite of the Spartan institution of 

310 



NOTES TO BOOK II 665 b 

the xopbs yepowTOiv Cleiriias is perhaps surprised at the inclusion, 
in any chorus, of old men of between 50 and 60, but that that 
chorus should be, so to speak, a " drunken " one, scandalizes him 
as much ns did the first suggestion (cp. 641 c 8) that fiWrj had an 
educational use. — In the mention of men " above fifty " we have a 
hint that the third " chorus " is a heterogeneous collection, and 
may perhaps fall into several classes. 

b 6. avTM : i.e. ^tovvcrti). 

b 7. dXrjOecTTaTa fxiVTot Aeyets : i.e. " you are quite right in 
thinking it extraordinary." — Xoyov 8rj Sec : Schanz follows A in 
writing A. 81 Set. 8-j ("the fact is") is more in place here — what 
follows is corroborative, not adversative — and the first hand in O 
gives it some support by reading Xoyov Set Stj. 

b 8. o7ry TovTo ktX., " (in fact it will, I expect, need a train of 
argument) to turn this arrangement, if made, into a defensible 
one." A comparison of the construction at 660 d 5 f., and, e.g., 
968 c 1, would lead us to expect evAoyws, and so Schanz corrects. 
It is surely rash to say that Plato had not the choice of the 
adjective here. 

c 2. irdvra goes in sense with all the accusatives that follow. 

C 3. Ka'i (before oAry) leads to a climax — " in fact " ; cp. 667 b 8 
and Phaedo 58 d aAAa Traprjcrdv rtves, Kal ttoXXol ye; it is the 
same Kat which we have in koI yap, Kal /xrjv. 

C 4. €7r<^8ov(Tav : €7ra)8r^ and €7raSetv are with Plato stock terms 
(cp. 666 c 6 o TToAAaKts elprjKaixeVj cTraSetv) of "soul-therapeutics" 
(Eusebius, H.E. iii. 4. 6, speaking of St. Luke, uses the term r/'vxwv 
OepaTrevTLKr]). The addition of €7r^8eti/ to aSetv, or its substitution 
for it, makes it easier for us to recognize that the \opeia here 
spoken of is often a mental process, not a bodily performance. 

c 2-7. Every educated man, woman, and child — slaves included 
— is capable of taking part in a \op6<i (6 /xev aTraiSevro? d\6p€vro<i 
rip.lv Icrrat 654 a), and they are to use these " spells " (i.e. those 
described in brief at 664 b 6 ff.) all their lives {p.r] iravea-dai irore) ; 
and, that their fascination for the performers themselves may 
never cloy, we are, " by hook or by crook " (d/Aws ye tto)?), to avoid 
uniformity, and without fail (Travrco?) to impart to them a subtle 
intricacy (of words, tune, and bodily movement) ; cp. Pind. 01. 
vi. 146 dv8pd(TLV al)(pi7]Tai(Ti ttAckcov itolklXov vp.vov. — locrre . . . 
rj8ovqv : lit. " so that the singers may have an unquenchable thirst 
for their songs, and pleasure (in its satisfaction) " ; cp. Eur. LT. 954 
u\ov rj8ov/jv, " enjoyed themselves." The aTrXrja-TLa is, apparently, 
to be secured by the absence of uniformity — which, as Ritter 

311 



665 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

says, is partly due to the different natures etc. of the different 
classes of singers — and the rjSovy] by the TroiKiA/a. — Eusebius, 
Stallb. says, has Tvepl rov Setv in c 2 for the MS. to Selv. It was, 
of course, open to the speaker to continue on the model of his 
own words a^a . . . o/xoAoyetrat ; or on that of his questioner 
— rov rrkpi ; But that is no reason why, with Ast, we should read 
rov 8etv. 

d 1. rovro TO apicrrov rrjs TroAecus : cp. 658 e, where it is 
claimed that old men are the best judges. (Ritter would read ravO^ 
for rovO', a good suggestion.) 

d 3. aSov : the participle is the principal verb in sense ; the 
question is, in effect, ' ' Where would the old men sing — the old 
men, whose songs (in subject matter) would be the best, and would 
therefore do most good ? " 

d 4. dvoyjrco's oi^Ttos, " in mere folly " ; so aTrAws ovrcos, paStoys 
ovro), ovroio-lv drpefxa {Gorg. 503 d). — Kvpiijjrarov, " perfect masters 
of" ; it includes, I think, the idea of "the best authority about" ; 
cp. Ep. 345 b ot Trepl twv rotovroiv TrdpurroXv ^tovvcriov KvpcMrepoi 
du eUv Kpirat, Ep. Slid Kvptwrepa Se rd rcHv Oeioiv dvSpiov fiav- 
revfxara rj rd twv fii^. 

el. \aipet ■^rrov irpdmav rovro: litotes for "does not like 
doing it," as is shown by the following " if obliged to do it." 

e 2. ocro) . . . Too-o) ixdXXov : added, with conversational 
asyndeton, in amplification of the comparatives ■jjttov and /xaAAov 
— " and the older and wiser he grows, the more he feels it." 

e 5. TravroLOLS dv6p(x>7roLS aSttv Icttws 6p96s : cp. Shakespeare's 
" (Nature might) stand up and say to all the world." 

e 6. eVi /xaAAov : he does not like doing it at all ; the being 
obliged makes it worse, the publicity of a theatrical performance 
is a " still further " aggravation. — Kal ravrd y' d suggests yet 
another grievance — the (fiojvao-Kos, with blind pedantry, might put 
the old man on meagre diet — just the opposite treatment, as the 
sequel shows, to what the case needs. 

e 8. Travrdiraa-iv ttov : these words gather up, as it were, the 
force of the climax ; he asks, in effect, " can you imagine a more 
distressingly ^ humiliating situation ? Every spark of ivpoOvixta 
would be stifled by it." — This comic picture helps to unsettle the 
notion that the xopeia of the mature and elderly is to be a 
literal one. 

666 a 2. a-uTovs possibly refers to all the " singers," not the 
third chorus alone. 

a 5. " TTvp kirX TTvpL' 7rapoL/XLa i^s fiefJLvrjraL Kai IIAaTcav ' KfXKOV 

312 



NOTES TO BOOK II 666 a 

£7rt KttKw," Photius. — o^eT^miv^ a metaplior from irrigation, is 
appropriate to the " liquid fire " of " drink " ; cp. As You Like It 
II. iii. 48 " For in my youth I never did apply Hot and rebellious 
liquors in my blood." 

a 6. Trplv kirl Tovs ttovoi'S €y\eipelv Tropevea-Oai, " before they 
address themselves to the work of life." Cp. Eur. Orestes 1068 
ctt' epyov 8', ws o/)a9, Tropevo/xaL. [F.H.D. prefers " before they 
attack their task."] 

a 7. evkafSov/xevovs (by way of varying the construction) agrees 
with the (imaginary) object of SiSacrKovres and subject of o^eTevetv ; 
the Aldine ed. emended it to ivXafSovfxevoi, which would agree 
with the subject of vo/xodeT-qa-oiJiev. — e/x/xaviys, "passionate, violent," 
is a less derogatory epithet than fjiavLioSrjs " crazy." 

a 8. yevecrOaL, and the following infs. o.Trcx^o'Oai, KaXelv, and 
TrapaKaXetv, are best taken as dependent on vofioOeTrjcroixev, not as 
on XPV (supplied from ov XPl)- 

b 1.^ Tov v€ov : not a precise term ; sometimes it is used of 
mere children ; sometimes, as here, used as the opposite of yepcDv. — 
A has Twv v€(x)v corr. by A^ to rov veov, which is the reading in 
Athenaeus x. 55, and Stobaeus, Flor. 44. 44. 

b 2. TerrapaKovTa iTTifSatvovra ercav, " when a man is rising 
forty," as we say — i.e. enters the fourth decade. This meaning is 
sufficiently defined by the previous p-^XP'' TpiaKovra erwv. — Iv rot? 
(TV(T(riTioLs eviox'Tj^^vra ktX. : the situation suggests an old-fashioned 
College Common -Room at Oxford or Cambridge. 

b 3. Kakdv seems used of the general invocation of the gods 
before the drinking began, and TrapaKaXetv is a slight variation of 
the general word to mark a special appeal. (Badham would reject 
KaAetv, thus making the position of the re more regular ; but it is 
difficult to see why anyone should have put it in, if it was not 
there.) 

b 4. A has Trpeo-^vraTcov, and Athenaeus TrpecrfSvTojVj Stob. 
and. Galen irpea-fSvTepojv (so Schanz and Burnet). — TcXerrjv a/xa 
KOi TratStav, " (to) what is at once the recreation, and the special 
religious privilege of the older men." The word reXeT'^v is 
specially appropriate, as it was used of a festival ceremony in 
particular ; at Eur. I.T. 959 the word is applied to the feast of 
the Xo€5. Athenaeus ii. 40 d can hardly be right in saying that 
Ttts €Tt p.€ttov<5 Koi /xera nvos p.va-TLKrjs 7rapa86(Teo)S kopras were 
called TcA-eras because of the large sums spent upon them — " reXilv 
yap TO SaTravav " — a feast was itself, as it always has been, a 
ceremony, involving initiation. 

313 



666 b .THE LAWS OF PLATO 

b 5. iTTLKovpov is here an adjective, qualifying (fidpfxaKov ; cp. 
Eur. I. A. 1027 \€p' kiviKovpov KaKiov, Or. 211 w (f>L\ov vttvov 
deXyqrpov eTriKOvpov vocrov. 

b 6. I have ventured to bracket the words tov olvov. It was a 
natural marginal explanation of (fxipfiaKov, and it is very hard to 
fit it in as well as 7]v and cfxipfxaKov in the text. I would trans- 
late T-)]v . . . (fidp/xaKov " the mystery and delight of the older 
men, which he has given to mankind as a charm against the 
austerity of age." (So, too, Peipers, Qu. Or. de PI. Legihus, p. 95. 
H. Richards suggests reading 7^s.for i)v.) 

b 7. I feel sure that Burnet is right in reading )^r)9rj for the 
MS. XijOi^v. The only way by which editors have made sense of 
the passage is to adopt the suggestion, made in the margin of Cod. 
Voss., to insert re after ptaXaKcoTepov, but the sentence runs much 
better in Burnet's form. 

C 1. KaOdirep eis irvp crtSrjpov evTeOevra yiyvopevov : so the 
MSS. 1 doubt the correctness of the construction to rjdo<i 
yiyverat Kaddirep criSrjpo'i els irvp evTeOets in the sense " the 
nature of the soul becomes like iron put into the fire." ytyvea-Oat, 
like efvat, can have an adverb as predicate, but I think such a 
sentence as the above would be hard to find. I suggest that what 
was written was Kadairepel eis, or possibly KaOairepel \. The 
sentence would then mean " becoming, so to speak, iron put in the 
furnace." (Ast, who reads /xaAaKwre/oov re, says we must supply 
piaXaKMTepov in sense with ytyvop^evov, " becoming softer like iron 
in the furnace.") [F.H.D. would bracket yiyvopevov.^ 

C 2. Kol ovTios evirXacTTorepov elvai : cp. 671 c irai^eveiv re koI 
■n-Xdrreiv . . . tovtov 8' etvat rov TrAacrTryv (see note on 671 a 4 — 
672 d 9). Ast's note on this passage is: " Frequens vero est 
comparatio animi ferocis cum ferro aqua tincto, molliti vero cum 
ferro igne cocto. Plutarchus de discrim. adul. p. 73 c [chap. xxx\a] 
locnrep 6 crtS-qpos TrvKvovTat rrj Tvepixpv^ei kol Se^erau rrjv (TTopnacriv 
dveOels rrpioTov vtto 6€ppi6ri]Tos koI p^aXaKOS y€vopL€vo<s." 

C 8. p.€T€X€Lv rjpiLv wS^s I it may naturally be asked here, " if 
this third chorus is to sing in private, where is the public benefit ? 
— who are to be ' charmed ' by it ? " This question is answered 
implicitly in the sequel, thus : " Their superior insight and 
training makes them the repository of correct taste. It is to them 
that the vopoder-qs must go when he wants to find what style of 
Xopeta is to be enjoined by law for the two other choruses ; and 
it is they who must supervise the poets and musicians." In other 
words, they are not primarily a performing chorus, like the other 

314 



NOTES TO BOOK II 666 C 

two. Their function is to be the mind of the state in the matter 
of \op€.La ; and in the exercise of their faculties the suppleness of 
intellect which is necessary in addition to the wisdom of 
experience is to be artificially supplied by wine. 

d 3. The MSS. have -rrotav Sk aLcra-ova-LV ot avSpes (fiOivrjv rj 
ixovirav ; rj SrjXov ktA. It is clear that atcrcrovcrLV (of which the at 
is in rasura in A) is a vox nihili, and so Ast, Stallb., and the Ziir. 
editors alter it to acrova-tv. Porson (in a note on Markland's note 
on Eur. Supplices 932), seeing that the act. fut. of ^'8w was almost 
as bad a solecism, corrected it to yjcrova-iv^ so too Cobet, in- 
dependently. Stallb. does not accept this manifestly correct 
emendation, because, he says, though (fxDvrjv Ikvo.i is idiomatic, 
Ikvai fioxkrav is unheard of. This valid objection is admirably 
met by Burnet's further emendation which greatly improves the 
rest of the sentence as well. He puts the mark of interrogation 
after (fnovijv^ and ejects the second t]. The zeugma is far less 
harsh when {xova-av is no longer in the same sentence as (fxovrjv ; 
also, not only does ^crovcnv go better with (fiO)vi^v alone, but 
irpkirovcrav goes better with jxovcrav alone. I would further 
write 7] for the first 17, and change the (/) after nva to a full 
stop. 

d 4. For the MS. Set Steph. suggested Sry, Ast et, Schanz act. 
— We may translate, " But what sort of a note will theirs be ? 
Clearly their ' music ' must be in keeping with their age and 
character." — The following passage from Phaedr. 259 d illustrates 
more than one point in the text : rfj Se Trpea-f^vrdTrj KaXXiOTrrj 
Ktti Try fxer avrrjv Ovpavia tovs 6V cfaXoaocfiLa Stayovras re Kal 
Tt/xwvras TTjv €K€lv(i)v p.ov<rLKrjv dyycWovcTLV, at 8rj [xaXicrTa Ttov 
Moixrwv TTcpt T€ ovpavov Kal koyovs oxxrat Setov^ re /cat 
dv6po)Trivov<s laxTL KaWuTTr^v (fnovqv. — (For the rejection of the rj 
after p^ova-av cp. 954 a, where Hermann successfully challenges 
another ij.) 

d 6. ^etot? dvSpda-Lif : i.e. men of renown and distinction ; great 
men. If the Ath. had here been asked : " Are all the members 
of the third chorus, then, great men ? " we should have been 
enlightened as to much that is obscure in Plato's idea about the 
Dionysiac Chorus. But the question was not asked, i.e. Plato does 
not mean to give us the details. 

d 8. rjp^els yovv . . . Kat ot'Sc : i.e. " we Cretans, and the 
Spartans." 

d 9. With 5vvat/x€^a it is easy to supply ^Setv from the 
relative sentence; but cp. on 663 e 1 and Phil. 23 d 9 StdKpLo-iv 

315 



^ .. . THE LAWS OF PLATO 

000 Q 

<j ' Ji\^ -vevoaci'ot, « whicli we were taiigM 

when we learnt to sing in chorus." _^^ 

e2. iv i<rT.ai KaT<i;K^Ko™v the use ot "'« J . jj 

^op/3aS« IS sound It 100^ must be the main predicate to 
for .V ;7'.^ i J'^';"^';;;;, ^^n in flocks, like so many colts 

K«T,,cr0., >ou ^^^P y°;^'„^ , f;, i,, Crete, and (Sow in Sparta, 
trftXcrter^s foTl balds^or classes in wh.h the youths 

"": rtyi.Vo.ra : as at iJej,. 493 b, Plato uses this verb in ite 

T': Hh ;res -th eXcat on being a lelgthy process.-l^:ro.d^o. 
"'' "itr tbl metaphorical language of this passage, wluch .s 
even playfully extravagant, indirectly ^prepares h>s hearers for 
his main metaphor as to the -.8^ and r>^«- ,^^ ,, ■ ^u 

due attention to his rearing the absence o tne _ ^ ^ 

^Kovra gives additional emphasis to ,rovTa-" m aU P"'"'^ ' / '^^ 

r:LA.> (and not y-'i-™)^" ^« *« -:;if ".lr.r, 

«=;nrh a rearing as will secure that . . . ror oi/t^^ ^^ 
cp ^rot 318e V-ted - *« -'«^ ""^ *^ "'"' ''"'^ °" ' ' ' 
" 667 a 1 Ast has collected many instances where 8^, instead of 
dXXi Ka.', follows ov (or /x,,) ^oi-ov, e.g - 47 e 1, 96o b 9. J 
,,.„,;,.,, «ie.^o or rath^^^ 

';ov:rof"7o-tt) • rh'w wouH apply to the part taken .n 
fhlstate by any member of a self-governing community.^ Cp^ 

:^:r:^i:o/.. .^.v .^. air<5. 8.o.kc^. ore.' / .<.o..a. ». ,,, 
^^r2"t8,^- r^:ry7L?L7eS^^^^^ member of the .^., 

--t?i^;x: "t iS^irat r S^^Urmanife^Uro^ 
K&TfVe whole tLtise (see below - J- ^^ 



NOTES TO BOOK II 667 a 

bravery not as the first, but as the fourth of virtue's possessions, 
whether for state or for individual." Cf. above 630 a 7 ff., where 
o-rao-t? is contrasted with foreign warfare. 

a 4. Burnet has made the connexion of the different parts of 
the sentence clearer by putting a comma after the words del Kal 
TravTa)(ov, which go closely with nixiovra. — The datives tStojTats 
and arvixTrdcrrj iroXei go with rkraprov dXX ov irpiarov KTrj/xa ; the 
value of this particular one of virtue's possessions is low, both 
for the state and for the individual. Cp. 661 b 5 Tavrd ecm 
(TVjXTravTa ScKaLOts fiev kol octlol's avSpdcrcv apicrTa KTry/zara. 
Cf. also Phil. 66 a C09 i)8ovrj Kxr^/za ovk ecrrt irpdrov ov8' av 
8evT€/5ov. Ast is wrong in putting in cos, by way of explana- 
tion, before rkraprov ; the dyaOos cTTpaTMTrjs does not so regard 
courage. 

a 6. OVK olSa oirrj or ovk oiSa ovTtva rpoirov — "somehow or 
other " — are frequently used with the sort of implication that the 
last speaker is " a little too clever." Cp. Gorgias 513 c, Phil. 19 a, 
Phaedr. 265 b. — TrdXiv av : the reference is to 630 d 2. 

a 9. eiirep : Heindorf on Parm. 150 b has collected many 
instances of this elliptical use; cp. e.g. 900 e, Ar, Nub. 226. — 
Tropeviofieda, el /3ov\ecr6e, "please let us go." Ast cps. Rep. 394 d 
dA/V oTTTj dv 6 Aoyos locnrep Trvevfxa (f^^prj^ ravrrj Ireov. 

a 10 ff. el yap e^ojxev /xovaav ktA. : this is the first un- 
equivocal declaration that the mature citizens of from thirty to 
sixty are not to form a xo/^os in the literal sense. We have now 
to find out what is the /jLova-a — what is the accomplishment or 
spiritual contribution, proper to the Dionysiac " choir." The 
keynote of the paragraph is given us in the words KaXXio) and 
KaAAio"Try. 

b 2. al(r)(vve(rOaL, ^rjTeiv 8e : the feeling of shame which, for 
these men, bars the way to public musical performances like those 
of the other choirs, has been fully described, but not their desire 
for the highest kind of activity. This desire is perhaps implied 
when they are called Oeioc dvSpes (666 d 6), and it is consistent 
with their being KvptioraTOL tiov KaXXtcTTOjv Kal dx^eXifJuoTdTiov 
tuSiov (665 d 4), and TrpodvfxoL tt/oos ras w8a? (666 a 2, and 
c 4) ; so that (^a/xev is here simply " we assert," not " we have 
asserted." 

b 5-c 3. " Is it not necessarily the case with all things that 
have any attendant charm, either, in the first place, that the 
very fact that it is charming is by itself the important point about 
the thing, or that what matters most is its correctness, or further, 

317 



667 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the advantage of it ? What I mean is this : take focxi and drink 
— any kind of nourishment ; a charm attends it which we should 
call pleasure. But as for what we should call correctness and 
advantage, just that out of any (eKacTTOTe) of our victuals which 
we call wholesome is in itself what is most correct " (i.e. in the 
case of food advantage and correctness coincide). — Cp. Gorg. 474 d, 
and 506 cd. — The main difficulty in the passage lies in the yv Se 
opdoTi^rd re koX w(f)eXtav. If, with Badham, we take these words 
to be the subject to eivat to opOoTarov, we get, as he says, a 
misere turhata sententia. But it is clear that the subject of etvaL 
TO o^^oraTov is avro tovto oirep vyicivov Xkyopxv. Therefore r^v 
ktX.j to which the antecedent would, if the sentence went on 
regularly, lie, like yaptv^ in the ace, is left suspended^ and the 
sentence suddenly takes another path. Cf. Phaedr. 233 b evTv- 
^owTa? 8e, Kai to, firj rjSovrjs a^ia Trap e/cetVcov kiraivov avayKa^et 
Tvyxdveiv. A nominative similarly suspended occurs at Rep. 
565 d to? dpa 6 y€va-djxevo<i rov dvBpiDTrtvov cTTrAay^vov, €V ttAAots 
aAAwv L€p€LO)V €Uo<s €y KaraT€Tixr^p.€vov, dvdyKTj 8r] rovTOi Xvko) 
yevea-dac. (Bdh. reads r'tjv for t^v and says that for opOorarov we 
want something like Trap€\6p.€vov ; Schanz agrees so far as to 
obelize opOoTaTov.) 

b 6. The {xovov is important, and is repeated at d 9. 

b 8. For the second Kal cp. 665 c 3. 

C 5. The two examples, drawn (1) from practical physical life, 
and (2) from the life of the intellect, are only preliminary to the 
consideration of the importance of clear notions about the distinct 
spheres of pleasure, correctness, and moral effect in the domain of 
(3) art. Above (657 e- 658 e) we have been told that the 
common idea that pleasure is the criterion in art is only true of 
the pleasure felt by certain trained and experienced judges. 
Again, at 663 c, the question was raised as to the value of 
different judgements. The present passage — 667 b 5-671 a 4 — 
is a development of the author's views on the subject. It falls 
into two parts : 

(1) 667 b 5-669 b 4 deals with the requisites of a com- 
petent judge. We here are told that what the true judge learns 
from experience and from training is, that there are further 
considerations besides pleasure which must be taken into account ; 
and indeed that it is doubtful whether a case would ever present 
itself in which pleasure could be severed from these. If these 
requirements are not satisfied, the right-minded judge will feel no 
pleasure ; and thus we are able, after all, to accept the doctrine 

318 



NOTES TO BOOK II 667 c 

that pleasure is the criterion in matters of art, provided that it is 
felt by tlie right persons. 

(2) The second passage (669 b 5-671 a 1) warns us of the special 
dangers and errors to which these judges of art are liable in their 
attempt to form a correct public taste. 

C 7. Kttt TO ev KOL TO KaAto? : not used here (as ev is at 
669 b 1) specially of the moral effect, but of the general praise- 
worthiness of the act of learning. Plato only lightly touches the 
subject of fjiddrja-LS here ; all he has to show is that the pleasure of 
learning is something distinct from the correctness of the thing 
learnt ; though he does not say, or mean to imply, that it is 
independent of it. 

C 9 ff. Tfc Se . . . 7rpo(rayop€V€Lv ; " and how about all the 
imitative arts which produce likenesses? Is not charm a proper 
name for any pleasure that may attend successful accomplishment 
of this ? " — I think Stallbaum is right in holding that the 
prominent position of the words ry twi/ 6/xota>v epyacrt^ is due to 
the contrast with the recently mentioned dX-qOeca : — this time it 
is not real things we are talking about, but copies of real things. 
The dative gives the grounds for the epithet etKao-rt/cat — " such 
as are elKacmKaL in virtue of their production of likenesses " ; 
similar adverbial datives occur at Meno 89 a koX tovtco tw Advo) 
<f)p6vjj(TL<i dv e'irj to (tx^eAt/xov, Theaet. 162 e iridavoXoyict, re Kal 
CLKOCTL \eyojji€VOv<s Aoyov9, Gorg. 513 c tw avTOJv ijOet Xeyoficvoyv 
Tiov X6y(j}v. — Schanz rearranges and emends as follows : tc Se tt)s 
Twv ojjLOLOJv epyacrtas; beginning a fresh question with oa-at ktX. 
— cp. Gorg. 509 d Tt Se Srj tov dSiKeiv ; where Heindorf's note is : 
" solet igitur triplex in hac loquendi forma casus adhiberi, 
nominativus, genetivus, accusativus." To the instances of the 
nom. following Tt 8e given by him on 6ror(/. 502 a our present 
passage may be added. In many of them, as here in A, the 
variant Sat occurs for Se. — The old vulgate read tl Sat; or ti Se; 
The punctuation I have adopted is Burnet's. 

d 1. TO fxkv rj8ovr]v €v avTOL^s yiyvecrdat TrapeTTO/xcvov, " that 
pleasure should be produced as a by-product." (All editors but 
Burnet put the comma before Trapeiro/xevov.) 

d 5-7. TTjv 8c . . . rjSovrj, " but the correctness of such pro- 
ductions we may, speaking generally, pronounce to be effected by 
exact correspondence both in quantity and quality, rather than by 
pleasure." 

e 1. irapk^eraL is most likely passive. For the change of mood 
Ast cps. Isoc. De pace 177 e, where ct tis . . . co-Tt is followed (in 

319 



667 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the MSS.) by (^povriioi — Miiller reads (fipovrL^ei. — fxyjS' av ye 
/3Xd/3r]v, " and of course, on the other hand, does no harm." 

e 2. rots aAAots refers to the same things as tovt<ov at e 4, i.e. 
a»</)€Xia, dXqOeia or ofioior-qs. (Stallbaum takes tovtwi/ to refer 
to f^Xdl3t]y and to stand for twv /BXafSepoyv.) 

e 3. i> Sr] . . . eiraKoXovOrj : cp. Philebus 52 e ff. where 
Socrates explains that it is not the extent, or even the intensity, 
of a quality which shows it in its truest and best light, but 
its pureness ; there must be no admixture of anything else 
with it. 

e 5 f. Cleinias's remark is merely an echo of the Athenian's 
fxrjS' av ye j3Xdl3r]v, "You would exclude, of course, any pleasure 
that had an admixture of pain." The remark serves to introduce 
the following statement of the Athenian, that in the case just 
imagined we should have TraiSta pure and simple — not TratSeia. 
At 668 b 1 he expresses a doubt whether this pure and simple 
TraiSid is ever to be found. 

elOff. dp ovv . . . oTwoGv dXXo); "may we not, in con- 
sequence of all this, assert, that a representation or imitation 
ought on no account to be estimated by the pleasure of it, or by 
somebody's empty opinion ? This applies to any instance of 
equality ; the equal is not equal, nor the symmetrical symmetrical, 
in any case, because somebody thinks it so, or because a thing 
takes somebody's fancy. — No, it must be estimated by no other 
thing in the world than by exactness of correspondence." I have 
followed Burnet in adopting Stallbaum's punctuation of this para- 
graph, i.e. in marking Kal Srj . . . oAws as a parenthesis. 

668 a 1. Almost every editor has his own way of emending 
the MS. r) p} TLS ixa-lpei rw). I follow St. and Ast in reading 
-^ €t Tts (xai>t -ri)). There is, as St. says, a " vestige "of this 
reading in the marginal note reported from Cod. Voss., 7) et tis 
TO ye Idov i(Tov. I conjecture that the course of the corruption 
was, that some scribe put in — perhaps inadvertently — 17 iir] after 
SoKct— that then ^ et was inadvertently dropped out. (It is just 
possible that the original reading was r] /X17, ^ eirts.) 

a 9. riKia-T dpa ktX. : Plato has not taken the trouble to 
reconcile this statement with that at 658 e 6. Verbally one 
contradicts the other. Keally the second statement sets aside the 
first by going a step further back in the explanation. At 658 e 
he allows that the rjSovrj of the perfect judge is a criterion ; here 
he says that, because that rjSovri turns out to be dependent on 
something else, that other thing is the real criterion. — We may 

320 



NOTES TO BOOK II 668 a 

translate, " then, if a man says that the value of fwva-iKrj depends 
on the pleasure it gives, this account will not do. You must by no 
means make a merely pleasure-giving fxova-LK-qv — if such there be 
— your serious object ; you must aim at that kind which is a life- 
like representation of what is right and good " — lit. " which 
preserves its life-likeness to the representation of the right and 
good." The last few words are very difficult. I take tw //t/xT^/xart 
as a genitival dative ; it would have been in the gen. but for 
the fact that tov KaXov depends on it. [F.H.D. appeals to 
the phrase otw '€olk€ twv d^toAoycui' ^tyUTy^arwi^ at 669 e 4. 
" Evidently," he says, " we might say oixotoTrjTa e^et d^ioAoyw 
fjn/xT^fxaTL^" and he holds that tu> tol KaXov /xi/xr^/xart means 
much the same as d^iokoyov /xi/xvy/xa, i.e. that no /xt/xr^/xa is " worth 
considering," in Plato's opinion, which is not a representation of 
TO Ka\6v. My note on the latter passage will show that I think 
that in neither passage is Plato really talking of the likeness of one 
representation to another representation, but of the likeness to a 
thing represented^ i.e. of the correctness of the representation. Both 
opdoTTj'i (b 6) and to Kakov are to be considered. Also the Ttjv 
before o/x. seems to me to be in favour of my view.] Ritter boldly 
says that /xi/xr^^a both here and at 669 e 4 means the thing 
imitated. But that would only help us here if we had tw KaAw /x. 
instead of tw tov KaX.ov /x. He allows us the alternative of 
taking toj t. k. fx. as a '■^ dativus caussae" "which gets its likeness 
by," or " from its imitation of to KaAoi/." (? Ought we here and at 
669 e 4 to give to /xt/xi^/xa the meaning pattern which it seems to 
bear at Politicus 274 a 2 ?) 

b 4. TovTots : the members of the Dionysiac Choir. 

b 6. yd/o, "you will remember." — -^v, w? ^a/xev, "was, according 
to us." The rjv sufficiently shows the reference to be to what was 
said a little time back, so that c^a/xev is a historic present. reads 
€^a/x€i/, unnecessarily. The reference is to 667 d 5 f. 

b 7. (iTroTiXeLv seems here to be used in the sense of " to repro- 
duce " or " represent " ; cp. below 8 1 7 b 8. 

b 10. For irepi c. ace. in place of a simple gen. cp. below on 
685 c 2. 

c 1. Kal TouTo ye fxiov ovk . . . ; this question does not merely 
put the previous statement in an interrogative form. The Trds- of • 
the 7rd? ay o/xoAoyoi means " anyone who considers the question" 
whereas the subject of fxojv ovk 6/xoAoyotcv is " all who are concerned 
in the production of the 7roi>j/xaTa " ; for in a sense the audience 
is helping to create the illusion. Cp. Arist. Poetics 1447 a 13. 

VOL. I 321 y 



668 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(Badhani says the Kat before tovto is quite out of place, and must 
be a mistake for eTret.) 

c 4-8. The difficulty of this passage, and the difficulty of 
reconciling it with what follows is due, I think, mainly to the 
want of a perfect analogy between the natures of the two arts of 
fxovcTLKrj and painting. Here we are dealing with the productions 
of fiovcTiKij. The terms ort wot ka-rtv and oiKrta are not used as 
" esoteric " terms of SiaXeKTtK'q, but in the general sense of nature : 
this is made clear by the following tl ttotc ^ovXerat and otov ttot' 
eo-Ttv etKwv oVtcus (cp. also 669 e 3 f.). They refer to the repre- 
sentation^ not to the thing represented ; i.e. the words mean not 
" what is the essence of the thing which the poet intends to 
represent ? " but " what is the representation really intended to be 
a representation of?" On the other hand the paragraph d 7-e 5 
deals with rot jxefiifirj/xiva [orw/xaTct], and there the ort ttot kcrriv 
means the nature of the thing that is copied by the painter — not 
its " absolute essence " in a dialectic sense, for art represents the 
outward characteristics (cfiaivo/xeva, cp. Rep. 596 e) of the individual, 
not the character of the type. The sphere of opOoTrjs, both in 
IxovcTLK-q and ypa(jiiK7], is the artist's technique. The ordinary 
spectator has experience enough of the world of feeling, and of the 
external world to enable him to feel the sensation the artist 
designs to produce, but he does not know how it is done, and 
could not correct the mistakes of an unskilful performer. Again, 
a man may have enough technical knowledge to criticize the artist 
(or even to produce the work of art), without being able to say 
whether the moral effect of the TroLrjfxa was good or bad. Thus we 
get the three classes, of (1) 6 ttoXvs ox^os, (2) the capable art-critic 
(and the Troti^rr^s ?), and (3) the capable vofxoderrjs, whose respective 
achievements are here described. — We may translate : " Then it 
seems that if a man wants to make no mistake about any 
particular production, he must know what it is. For if he does 
not know its nature — does not know, that is, what it means to 
represent, and of what it really is the image, he will hardly 
discern whether the intention is correctly carried out or not." — 
Badham may be right in reading /uLi/ji^crews for ^o »» A-^o-ews at c 8. 
It is difficult to see how rrju opdorrjra rrj^ ^ovX-qcrews can mean 
• the correct carrying out^ or right realization, of the intention (cp. 
682 a 9), and yet that is the meaning we must have here. On 
the other hand avrov, which stands for rov Troi-qfiaro's — the 
constr. being ttjv 6p6. rj Kat d/x. t^s fSovX-qa-^w^ — goes better 
with it than it would with rrjs fMLfxyjcrews. — Badham meets this 

322 



NOTES TO BOOK II 668 C 

objection by reading av for avTov ; but this again seems too 
circumstantial. 

C 7. oi/Tws, as Ritter observes {Unters. iih. PL p. 59), is one of 
the words distinctive of Plato's later language ; it occurs 50 times 
in the Laws, and only 9 times in the Republic (21 times in the 
Sophist, 15 times in the Philebus, 11 in the Politicus and 8 
in Tim.). 

d 1 f . TO ye €v Kol TO Ka/vws : for ev and KaKOJS in this connexion 
cp. Pep. 377 d and e edv ns /xr) KaXoJs xpevSrjTai, and OTav iiKa^y 
Tts KttKw?, where PL is speaking of the moral effect of poetry. — 
The modern reader can hardly help asking here " why should not 
the plain man, who has no technical skill or knowledge, be able 
(in some cases at least) to pronounce on the moral character of a 
production of jxavo-iK-q ? " Possibly Plato holds that, the moral 
judgement being of a higher kind, it can only be satisfactorily 
performed by a mind which has had practice in the lower kind, 
i.e. the aesthetic. — Or is it a knowledge of psychology that is 
necessary ? — Or again, is it merely that the recognized connoisseur 
can speak with more authority ? 

d 5. Kara tyjv oxJ/lv tjixlv., " which make their appeal to our sense 
of sight." 

d 7. €v TovTois : cp. 645 d 4 and 646 e 2 for neuter pronouns 
referring to feminine nouns. 

d 8. TUiv o-w/xarwv : I think Badham is right in rejecting these 
words. They make the sentence awkward, and are unnecessary. 
It is not till the next sentence but one that he takes a human or 
animal body as an example. [F.H.D. says " No : because sight is 
concerned with bodies."] 

d 9. TO ye 6pd<jj^ avTwv etpyacr/xevoi^, " what was correct in their 
execution." 

d 10. Tovs dpidfjiov^ is, I think, to be taken, as well as ras 
6^ecr€i9, in sense with eKaa-Tiov twv /xe/xov ; tov (rtoixaTos is put 
early in the sentence, instead of after twv [lepijiv, for rhythm's sake. 
(Heindorf suggested that for dpiO/xovs we ought to read pvBixovs, 
and Badham dpfMo{)<s ; but neither goes well with oo-ot T€ ela-iv. 
As the fxipi) of the crw/xa are mentioned, we need no further 
particularization of parts such as dppLoL The two points are : 
(1) how large are the numbers of the different parts ? and (2) which 
ought to come next to which ? — -Ast, who refers to Xen. Anab. ii. 
2. 6 d.pi6fji(j<i Se ttJs oSov . . . iTTodpiol Tpels kul evevqKOVTa, 
translates dpL6p.6<s here by measure) Stallb. by die Grossenverhaltnisse, 
Jowett by ^^proportions " ; L. & S. say it stands for " the whole " of 

323 



668 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the body. — The reason why dpidfiois is plural is that the human 
body has sets of members, the sets being of different " numhers." 

e 1. The subject of e'x^'' ^^ easily assumed, from the previous 
eipyaa-jjiivov and the following eLpyaarai, to be to dpyaa-fx^vov^ 
i.e. the picture. 

e 2. With xpuifxara and o'X'jP'O.Ta we can easily supply irpocr- 
yjKovra from the previous Tvpocn^Kova-av. 

e 8. TO, kavTov : i.e. to, TrpocrrjKOVTa. 

66oa 2-6. apd ye . . . eyLyvMcrKOfiev, " Does it follow, without 
more ado OySr;), that the man w^ho has been equal to this judgement 
must be able easily to decide this further point — whether the work 
of art is beautiful, or, if not, where it may be thought to be 
deficient in 'beauty'?" 01. "Why, in that case, I should say 
that pretty well all of us" (i.e. all the world) "would (equally) be 
judges of the beauty " (we should say the points) " of animals." 
(So Ast.) 

There are difficulties about this interpretation, but I think it 
follows the line of least resistance. For tw yvovn we should have 
expected tov yvovra — but cp. Rep. 353 e avayKr; dpa KaKy ^vxjj 
KttKw? apx^f-v Ktti eTTLfxeXelcrOaL ; also it is rather surprising to find 
the Cretan so ready to admit the difficulty of deciding whether an 
animal was beautiful or not. Perhaps he speaks as a farmer, think- 
ing of the points of stock. (Jowett translates, " Must we not also 
know whether the work is beautiful, or in any respect deficient in 
beauty ? " CI. " If this were not required, stranger, we should all 
of us be judges of beauty." Ritter takes Cleinias's remark to mean 
that the decision about beauty is one for which any man is com- 
petent.) It follows that, if Cleinias is right, " all the world " would 
be in the position of tw ravra yvovn, i.e. would be competent to 
pronounce upon the opOory]'^ of the picture of an animal. The 
analogy, however, from painting (or sculpture) does not serve to 
explain the processes of the appreciation of iiova-iKt] — which, we are 
soon to be told, are difficult to follow — it only makes clear what 
are the three stages of acquirement to which attention is to be 
drawn. 

a 8. Badham, for Kal Trai/rv;, would read rravra — unnecessarily ; 
TTOLVTrj generalizes the statement. 

a 9. Boeckh proposed to read 6, tl for o re : either is possible ; 
cp. Prot. 352 e StSacrKciv o ecmv avTOts tovto to Trddos, Phaedo 
65 e 1 Trj<5 ovdia^, o TvyxdvoL eKacrrov 6V, and Meno 92 c with 
E. S. Thompson's note. 

]) 1, o)s €v : not, as Jowett, "that it has been well executed " ; 

324 



NOTES TO BOOK II 669 b 

the eu, as at 668 d 2, refers to the higher aesthetic or moral judge- 
ment on the performance. 

b 2. py]fia(TL T€ Kal /xeAeo-t kol tols pvOfioU : these words make 
the paragraph hopelessly illogical. Even if Badham's objection to 
TTavrrj be upheld, the r^Turovv emphasizes the fact that the question 
considered is a general one, applying equally to different kinds of 
artistic production. With this it is impossible to fit in words 
specifically describing a production of one kind only. It is not 
till the next paragraph that we return to the special consideration 
of the branch novoriK-q. I have therefore ventured to bracket 
these words. 

b 5. /J-rj TOLVvv d/reiTroj/xei/ Aeyovres ktA. : cp. 769 e ovk av 
TTore Xeyojv oLTretTTOL to tolovtov Trptv eirl T€X.o<i eXOeiv. " Now we 
must not fail to point out how it is that ixovctlkyi is such a difficult 
subject." 

b 6. cTreiSr] yap v/xveirat . . . €iKoi/a>v, " the fact is that, 
while it is more discussed than other sorts of images, it needs quite 
the most careful treatment of any." €7retSr^ introduces rather 
attendant circumstances here, than cause. The two reasons why 
the subject is difficult are given afterwards (d/xaprwv re yap ktA.). 
For €7ret8rj, "at the same time that" or "although," cp. Rep. 348c 
iTreiSr) Kai, Phaedo 87 a 8, Apol. 27 c 10 ; for Ittci "although" (Ast 
on 686 b 2 says " cttci, quanquam, alioqui") cf. Symp. 187 a, Prot. 
353 a, Apol. 19 e ("and yet") and below 794 d 7, 875 c 3. — Stall- 
baum thinks the to which the Aldine ed. put in before rrepl avTr^v 
indispensable : I think we do better without it. v/jLvetrai is 
impersoiml like Xekc^do) at Tim. '89 d (7re/ot fxev tov kolvov (mov 
. . . ravrrj XeXkyOiJi). — For the omission of the Trepi before ras 
ctAAas Ast cps. 685 b and Soph. 227 b. 

b 8. apLapruiv t€ yap . . . Moixrcui', "not only is a mistake 
most injurious" (cp. above 656 b 4) "by which you are led to 
entertain bad dispositions, but it is very hard to discover, because 
our poets are not exactly as gifted as the Muses themselves." — - 
Stallb. reminds us of the celebrated passage in the Republic (401 d) 
on the far-reaching effects of good and bad Music : KvpnoraTy] ev 
fJiOva-LKy Tpo(f)-qj otl fxaXLO-Ta KaTaSverat ei's to €Vt6? tyJs \/'VX^^ 
o t€ pv6iJ.o<; Kol app.ovLa, kol kppoip.€vk(TTara airTCTaL avrrjs, (})€povTa 
Trjv €V(r\iffxocrvvrjVj Kal Troiet €t'(7)(rj/xova, Idv T6S 6p$u)<s Tpa<f>rj, et 8e 
p-rj rovvavTLov ktX. — The ironic litotes of the indictment of the 
poets and musicians of Plato's day strikes the key-note of the 
bitter invective which follows. 

C 4. The MSS. have \puipLa yvvaiKfjiv : I have adopted the 

325 



669 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Aldine correction of x/ow/xa to <T\rjixa. It is not likely that, after 
protesting against the "slang" term iv^pmv fxekos at 655 a 7, 
Plato should here use xp^fxa in the sense of "complexion" or 
"style" of music; besides, the corresponding instances which 
follow show that we want the mention of <j\riiia here. (It is 
hard to see how, from the fact that, at 668 e, we have xpiiifxara 
T€ Kttt crxT]f^oLTa in the sense of the colours and outlines of a 
picture^ Stallbaum concludes that we ought to read XP^^H-^ '^'^^ 
(r\rip.a here.) — For the general sense of these terms of ixovo-lktj 
cp. above on 653 e 5 and 654 e 4. Here (as at 654 e 4) (rxrjixa 
doubtless denotes bodily posture or gesture — possibly the grouping 
of a chorus. 

C 7. The VTTO- in virodetcraL has doubtless the meaning as an 
accompaniment ; the preposition is used in this sense, apparently 
with all three cases. 

c 8. ert 8c ktA. : a description of what would now be called 
" musical fireworks,^' or " programme music." One is reminded of 
Dr. Johnson's " I would it were impossible " of the difficult piece 
of music. 

d 2. w? eV Ti /xi/xop/xtvat, " when professing to represent some 
one thing." 

d 3. Badham thinks e/xTrAcKovres a mistake for crvfxirXkKovri<;. 

d 4. ykX(ji)r av . . . T€/oi/'tos : a rather curious use of 
Trapa(rK€vd(u). I do not think it means " call forth laughter from 
the men," but " furnish an object of mockery for all the men 
whom etc." Cp. yeAwra rrapelxov Gorg. 474 a, yeAwra 8r) tov e/xe 
cv Toi<s XoyoLS ttTreSet^ev Theaet. 166 a. I.e. I think we ought to 
supply rovTOL<s as the antecedent to ocrovs, and to take tcuv 
dvOpioTTiov as a partitive gen. dependent on oa-ovs. Lobeck's 
comment on these words (Aglaoph. ii. p. 948) is, " Orphei sententia 
huiusmodi fuisse videtur : ocrcroL "}i/3r)<s fierpov lkovto, Xdxov Se 
T€ repxptos ioprp', i.e. 'quicunque ad pubertatis annos et ad eam 
aetatem adoleverunt, quae Veneri matura habetur.' Hinc Plato 
transfert ad judicii maturitatem, illudque musicae genus, de quo 
loquitur, omnibus, qui in his rebus aliquem sensum habeant 
veraeque voluptatis capaces sint, taedio fore dicit." We may 
translate " (are greatly given to such jumbles and confusions) as 
would furnish matter for the scorn of all whose ' power of delight,' 
as Orpheus says, ' is in its happy priiue.' " — (H. Richards would 
read oo-ots for oa-ovs.) As Hamlet told the players, "this 
overdone . . . though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but 
make the judicious grieve." 

326 



NOTES TO BOOK II 669 d 

d 6. The subject of opwa-i is, as Stallb. says, " non poetae, sed 
htimines maturioris judicii " ; the same people are the subj. of 
yty vwcTKciv at e 3, and (perhaps) viroXa^eiv at e 5. (Badham 
does away with the need of supposing this change of subject by 
inserting rots before twv ai/^pcoTrtoi', removing the full stop after 
T€/3i/'io?, and substituting 6^ for re yap — taking opajcrt as a 
participle. He also reads €l tl for en (€*rt A). By itself this 
last change obviates one of the changes of subject, and Schanz 
adopts it. But what follows seems too large and emphatic a 
statement to be introduced in a subordinate ei' tl clause, 

d 7. i/'tA.ovs : not prose, without metre as Ast and L. & S. 
here, and Menex. 239 c {Xoyco j/'tAoj), but, as Stallbaum, without 
music (or tune). — It is difficult to be sure of the meaning of 
(rxqixaTa here. It seems safest to understand it, as before, of the 
bodily postures of the reciter, (Bitter thinks this sense in- 
admissible here, and suggests (p. 33) for it die Form des Ausdrucks, 
and assigns the same meaning to crx-qfjiaTa at 655 a 1. I think 
R. is wTong in holding, as his chief ground for this decision, that, 
in all these cases, we are bound to suppose that the element — 
whether words, or tune, or rhythmic motion or posture — which 
Plato mentions firsfy must be thought of as ^^ gefunden und fest- 
gestellt" before the other elements are provided. When Plato 
speaks of one set of elements as accompanying another set, he 
does not necessarily imply that the two sets were composed in 
the order in which they are mentioned.) 

e 1. With fxeXos we are intended to supply some such verb 
as iroiov(TLv — or perhaps ttoiovvtcs. — All through this passage 
pvOfxQ^s seems to apply to rhythmic bodily motion, not to any 
metrical arrangement of the words, though in the last instance 
there is room for doubt. On the whole it is most likely that 
\pi.Xy Kidapicrei re koI avAr^o-et does not mean that the performance 
is confined to musical instruments alone, but that the tune {jik\o<i 
— played on the instruments) which accompanies the bodily 
gestures (pvO/xos) has no words sung to it. 

e 2. 7rpo(rxpyj(T 6 at, as generally used by Plato, differs no more 
from xpricrBai. than "to call in the aid of" differs from the 
simple " to use " in English, but here irpocr- seems to mean " as an 
accompaniment " (to the pv6fj.6s). 

e 4. OTO) €OLK€ Twv (x^LoXoyiDv fiLfxyjixdroyv : Ast, who mentions 
that at Xen. Mem. iii. 10. 5 /xt/xry/xara is a MS. variant for the 
undoubtedly correct /xt/xT^ra, boldly assumes the converse mistake 
here, and reads /xLfirjTuJv ; Ritter as we saw above, on 668 b 2, holds 

327 



669 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

that jxLjjLTjfia can be used in the sense of /xt/xr^roi/ ; Stallbanm 
thinks that Plato allowed himself to say /xifxyjixara when he meant 
fXL/x7]Td. The most satisfactory account of the passage seems to me 
a variety of Stallbaum's view, i.e. that Plato allowed himself to 
put oT(i) Tujv a^. fii/x. as a brachylogy for otw ruiv iv rots d^ioXo- 
yoLs /xt/x7y//acri /xe/xi/xvy/xevwv (" to which individual among those to 
be found in worthy representatious "). We get a hint of what is in 
his mind from his specification of the contemptible — i.e. not 
d^ioXoya — attempts to represent e.g. the cries of animals. As 
against Ast and Ritter, it is the attempt to represent, rather than 
the thing to be represented, that is characterized here ; besides, 
Ritter by no means establishes for ixL/j-r^fxa the sense he desiderates. 
(For another alternative see above on 668 b 2 t(^ tov KaXov /jufx.) 
At 796 b irpoG-qKovra is used much in the sense of a^ioAoya here 
— oca kv TOL<i 'x^opoL'i ecrrtv av fXifXT^fiara Trpocn^Kovra fjufieLcrdaL. 

e 5. aAAa vTToXafSeLv dvayKaiov^ " no : (these men of taste) 
cannot fail to come to the opinion . . . " — ttoXXtj^ dypoiKias 
p^ea-Tov, " is the height of barbarism." 

e 6. TTctv TO roiovTov OTTOCTOV Ta>(oi'9 . . . (f)LXov '. I cauuot 
help suspecting that o-(f>6Spa (J>lXov was originally a commentator's 
explanation of some out-of-the-way word, such as o/jeKxtKov, which 
governed the genitives — cfytXov being used in the poetic and late use 
of fond of. Ast boldly gives (f>iXov that sense in the text. If the 
text is sound, and if we reject Ast's interpretation, the most 
likely interpretation of Ta>(ov§ and the other genitives is that they 
depend on wdv ottoctov, being of the nature of the gen. in to 
dppovLas Kal pv6p,ov 670 e 6, and the common to ttJs Tv^T^Sf to 
Tr^s Te;(i'7^s ; " everything in the way of speed, etc." Less likely is 
it that the genitives go closely with <jiiXov to denote the source of the 
liking, cp. OavpLacTTrj paG-T(itvrj<s at 648 e, and the gen. with aya/xat, 
Oavp,d^(D, (tjXoi ; or that it is a gen. of definition, as in /xa/ca^tov 
Tvpdvvov xprfpia {Rep. bQl e). We may translate, "all that sort of 
display (is the height of barbarism) w^hich consists in speed, perfect 
execution, and the power to reproduce the cries of animals, which 
is (so much) the rage that ..." 

e 7. A further looseness of structure in the sentence is that 
too-Tc goes on as if ovtws had preceded it, and a subject has to be 
provided for ^pr^a-dai, i.e. the people whose bad taste has just been 
described. 

670 a 1. TrXrjv ocrov vwo, "except where it is accompanied 
by," i.e. " without being accompanied by." ttXyjv ocrov as a sort of 
compound preposition occurs again at 856 d 3, where it governs a 

328 



NOTES TO BOOK II 670 a 

gen. — iZ-iXw (Karepo) : this dat. is doubtless governed by xp-qa-^bi^;, 
and the gen. ^pi^creitis means literally " {afMovaia) is involved in the 
employment (of)." The construction is made to seem more natural 
by the fact that xprja-Sai with a dative has come just before. (Cp. 
631 d, 640 b, and 657 c.) — The 6' after (/'tAw — we expect yap — and 
the abrupt change in construction which it involves, are strange. 
We may translate, "whereas the employment of either (flute or 
harp) by itself involves a mere tasteless catch-penny virtuosity." — 
A comparison of this passage with Re-p. 531a, Laics 655 a 7 and 
8 1 2 d e would seem to show that the thought of a certain school 
of musicians was enough to make Plato go near to lose his 
temper. 

a 3. TttVTa fikv (E\€L TavTYj Aoyov, "so much for the philosophy 
of that." — What follows is as good as saying, "perhaps we have 
spent too much time on the wrong music " ; ye is " after all." — By 
the mention of the quinquagenarians separately from the younger 
men of the mature class, Plato seems to hint that the Dionysiac 
Choir is not homogeneous : the older men may have different 
duties and different needs from those of the younger. 

a6-b 2. ToSe . . . Trpoa-qKYi^ "well, from what has gone before 
we may logically deduce this much : that all the quinquagenarians 
who are expected to sing must have had a training superior to that 
of the members of an ordinary chorus." — As at 829 d 7 yurySe T6va 
Tok/JLoiv aSeiv aSoKt/xov /xorcrav, I think p,ovu"t]<i here ought not — 
as it does in all texts but Ast's — to begin with a capital letter. — 
The literal meaning is, " to have been taught something better 
than the choric music." 

b 1. ocTOLcnrep av aSeiv TrpoarrjKy : it is not clear whether we 
are to undei-stand from these words that only a select band from 
among men between fifty and sixty are actually to sing, or whether 
by aSeiv we are to undei-stand generally " to take their part in the 
Music of the State." What follows seems to point to the latter 
explanation, though the previous reference to the effect of wine on 
the old (666 b) favours the former. 

b 4. (5 irpocT-QKev . . . 6pOco<^ "^ fxyj : these words seem to be a 
loosely expressed explanation of what is meant by yvajvai rrjv 
opBoTi^ra Ti^v fxiXoJv, and look suspiciously like a commentator's 
work. I cannot accept Stallbaum's explanation of w irp. -t) /jlyj irp. 
Tov Scu/otcTTi, " qui curaverit vel etiam non curaverit harmoniam 
Doricam, h.e. qui harum rerum fere incuriosus et ignarus fueritP 
The writer meant, " (and be able to say) what tune the Doric scale 
suited or did not suit." That settles the question of correctness of 

329 



670 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

ap^ovia. The following words, whicti deal with the question of 
pvOfjio^ are still more loosely expressed, rov pvO/xov, like tov 
8iopi(rTi, goes with TrpocryjKev — w 7rpo(ry]K€v being supplied in 
thought ; and qpOois rj py is " sliort " for irorepov opOios Trpocrrjij/ev 
7) fiyj. (Heindorf, commenting on the omission of Trorepov before 
ravrov r) erepov at Gorg. 488 d, says : " in Platone exempla ubivis 
sunt obvia." — Eitter's "whether rightly or not" wants eire opdm 
€iTe /xij.) I have bracketed these words mainly because of their 
slovenly style, which is matched by the logic shown in the 
specification of a single " mode " in a general statement (see also 
on c2 below). A comparison of e 1 and 812 c Iff. suggests that 
under the term opOorrjs here Plato includes not only formal, 
musical correctness, but also the ev of 669 b 1, i.e. tlie moral effect 
of the music as well. 

b 10. Badham's correction of the MS. avTcov to avAw seems to 
me a certain one ; avTMV is quite out of place. 6 ttoAvs oxAos . . . 
ocroL is a variety of ' the ordinary Travre? ocrot, and both ocroi and 
its antecedent refer to the same people, whereas ocrot avTMv would 
modify 6 ttoXvs o^Aos by the addition of "such of them, that is, 
who." On the other hand Trpoa-a^eiv avX<x) accords admirably with 
l^aLveLv €v pv9p,<Z, — yeydvacrt ^ir^vayKau-pikvoL, " have been drilled." 
Heindorf quotes this passage, along with Soph. Ajax 588 and 
Phil. 773, as illustrating Sojphist 217 c p^rj tolvvv . . . d7rapvy]0el^ 
yevYj (Lobeck on Aj. 588 quotes Pollux 104 tStov to IIAaTwvos jxr] 
aTTapvrjOd'i y^vrj). 

C 1. oTL . . . (rvXXoyi^ovTaL, " though they do not realize that 
they are doing this without knowing a single thing about it." 

C 2. TO Se TTOV . . . rjpLapTr]p€V(j)<s, " yet the fact remains that 
every musical composition is correct if it has the right elements, 
and faulty if it has the wrong ones." These words gather up the 
ideas of the Athenian's long speech (669 b 5 — 670 b 6), by way of 
specification of what is meant by rrjv opOorrjra t(Jov /xeAwi^ (b 4). 
(They would have been quite superfluous if (5 TrpoarJKev . . , 6p6ios 
Yj pLTi had been part of the original argument.) Eitter (p. 77) is 
surely wrong in holding that 6p9Q><^ ty^et and 7rpo(T7]KovTa here, 
and the ev- in evdppioa-Tov and evpvOpiov aie used not of technical 
but of moral correctness, and that the paragrapli introduces the 
third of the considerations defined in 669 a 7-b 2. 

C 5. Tt ovv ktA. : these words continue the idea of the '^xov 
in c 2, *' what, further, about the man who does not even know 
what the piece contains ? " i.e. who does not know one dppovia 
from another, or does not know the difference between a noble and 

330 



NOTES TO BOOK II 67OC 

a servile pvOfi6<;. — I follow Schanz and Buinet in accepting 
Bekker's oirep for the MS. on nep. 

c 6. €v oTioovv : the only meaning I can suggest for these 
words is " in any resjDect," i.e. in any of the points specified in 
669 c 3-8. (The general sense *' in the case of anything whatever " 
does not agree with otl ttot €;(€i, for we must, in that case, 
suppose that €x.€t has not the same subject as the e'x*'' i^ ^^® next 
line.) 

C 8. All 'modern editors accept Boeckh's av to, vvv for the 
MS. avToL vvv. The av refers to the previous traversing of the 
same ground in 668 b 4-d 2. 

c 9. rjfiiv : a genitival dative, like the vfilv in 624 a 1. — riva 
TpoTTov qualifies and apologises for the " bull " : the process is 
described in 666 b. (This is better than taking it with otSeti/ as 
implying that it was not real singing that was expected from 
them.) 

d 1 ff. The three stages of requirement to be reached by the 
Dionysiac Choir are not so distinctly enumerated as we should 
expect, and the connecting particles are not quite logically used. 
In forui it looks as if the p-^^pi ye toctovtov and p-'e\pL rov 
^vvaTov etvai referred only to the first stage, and at the same time 
the second stage is rather mixed up with the first by the iVa 
clause in which it (the second) is introduced, and the third stage 
again is tacked on to the second merely by a Kai But the 
repetition of pL^xpi- to(tovtov at e 2 shows us that the first p^^Xpt- 
roarovTov really referred to all three stages. This is a mark of 
hasty writing, and the clearness of the general meaning may perhaps 
authorize a little manipulation of the connecting links in transla- 
tion ; e.g. we might translate I'va " that further " (they may be 
able etc.). I do not think, that is, that Plato means, what he appears 
to say, that the power of right selection will follow as the result 
of the power to take an intelligent part in a chorus. In the 
writer's mind the iVa goes back to the pe\pL toctovtov TreTrat- 
Seucr^ttt. (Another possibility is that iva marks the preceding 
stage as necessary before they can KaOopav.) 

d3. ^oxreLs occurs in connexion with pv6p,0L also at Rep. 
399 e ; here it seems to mean not merely footsteps, but any marked 
division of bodily gesture by which time could be kept with the 
music. 

d 4. Ka9opu)VT€<i ktX.j " that (further), having their eyes open 
to the nature of scales or tunes and rhythmic motion, they may 
both be able to select what befits men of their age and. standing, 

331 



670 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

and may sing them as they should be sung," KaOopiovres, like 
KttTiSwi' at 632 c 4, and 652 a 2, is used of a survey which results 
in knowledge. 

d 5. T^]X. Kat Toi. : cp. 686 b ap ovk ol^lov €7rt(rK07reiv Trj\.iKOv- 
Tov Kat TO(rovTov (Tva-rriixa rjTLS ttotc Ti^)(rj SiecftOeLpe; — The words 
refer only to the choosers themselves (not " for men of any 
particular age and kind "), but it is thereby implied that the 
choosers will be able to choose for others as well as for themselves. 

d 6. ovTios : i.e. TrpeTrovTMS. 

d 7. ao-ti'€t5 : this word, followed as it is by rjOiov ^(^prja-roiv 
dcnraa-fjLov, refers to the danger against which we are cautioned at 
656 a 7 and 669 b 8, that bad music may produce bad morals. 

e 1. y)y €fx6v€s yiyvojvTai : it is not clear from this passage 
whether the influence of the older men on the taste of the younger 
is that of example, or is by w^ay of precept. A comparison of 
666 c inclines us to the latter view ; the to irapaxprjfJ-o. too seems 
to suggest that the actual singing has more effect on the singers 
themselves, and that the effect on the young is subsequent, i.e. 
that the older men's theoretical and practical skill enables them to 
give good teaching to others, — ao-Tracr/xo? occurs again at 919 e, 
where it is used as the opposite of /micros. 

e 3, Trj<s (ttI to Ti-Xi^Oos cfi^pova-qs : (f)€p€iv with ets, €7rt, or 7r/30? 
is used like the French porter, and our " to bear upon " (a subject), 
for " to be concerned with," " to apply to " ; cp. Rep. 538 c dAAa 
TTY} Trpos Toi"s aTTTOfxevov^ TOiv Xoyojv avrrj cjicpei -^ eiKiJov ; (The 
transitive use of (^kpav kiri in this sense is common in Plato ; e.g. 
Rep. 478b). — av €L€v fxeraKexctpLo-pevoL, "would have become 
masters of"; cp, Polit. 268 b 5 t'^v Trj<s avrov TroLfMvr]<s apicrra 
pfra)(^€Lpi^o/ji€vos fxovcriKyjv. 

e 4. rrj<; Trepl tov? ttoit^tois avrovs : equivalent to Trj<s twv 
TTotryrwv' avrayv ; it is not necessary to supply (^epoiVrys — or even 
oixnf]s. 

(As first written in A, to ttXtjOos had no preposition before it : 
€7rt was afterwards put in above the line. According to Schanz 
and Burnet, Badham substituted Trepl for this ctti, and Schanz does 
so in his text. Badham's note {Conv. Epist. p. 10) is ambiguous ; 
I think he means to substitute kwl for the irepl in e 4.) 

These remarks of the Ath. are significant of Plato's views on 
poetry, and the poetic inspiration. At Rep. 401 b ff. he says super- 
vision must be exercised over poets by the state {eTrLcrraTyjTeov Kat 
Tvpoa-avayKacrrkov), as also over the Srjpiovpyoi, to secure that they 
should produce only what is right and good {rr^v tov dyadov eiKova 

332 



NOTES TO BOOK II 670e 

YjOovi e/xTTotciv Toi? TroLy'jfxacTLv). His views on the poets and 
jxovaiKoi of his time would .seem to liave hardened since writing 
the passage in the Republic^ for there he contemplated the possi- 
bility that there should be 8i]fiLovfjyoi (and, by implication, Trotr^rat 
— cp. 402 d) ^vvafj^evoi L\\'€.v€.iv r'i]v rov ko.Xov re Kal eva-^-Qij.ovo'i 
(pv(rtv : here he talks as if the iron^rai at all events are not likely 
to have that power. 

e 7. Kttt Sei'Te/aov, " as well as of the thing mentioned in the 
second place " ; i.e. as well as the power to choose the right pvOfMos 
and ap/JLOvia. 

671 a 1 ff . We may perhaps translate, "or with all his chanting he 
will never enchant the young to love virtue." It is not necessary 
to suppose that he has the word xopov in mind when he writes 
LKavov €7no86v (after tois 8e two lines above). As Heindorf says 
on Gory. 478 c, "satis frequens (est) huiusmodi a plurali ad singu- 
larem transitus." — Kal oirep . . . yeyovev, " well, when it began, 
the argument aimed at showing that our advocacy of the Dionysiac 
Choir was not mistaken, and it has done its best. We must now 
inquire whether it has succeeded." — As at 664 e 3 (Kar dp)(^a<s twv 
Aoycov), €v a.p)(^aL's here means at the beginning of the account 
of the Chorus of Dionysus. At a 7, however (oTre/o vireOep^eda Kar 
dpxa.9 dv. €Lvai yiyv.)^ Kar ap;(a§ refers to the beginning of the first 
pWt] discussion (640 c 1). — It is better, with Stallbaum, to take 
Kakios \eyoiJi€vr]v as predicative with cTrtSet^at, not as attributive 
to /So-qdecav (so Ast and Jowett : "bring eloquent aid"). What 
follows is in no sense a vindication of the eloquence of the Xoyos. 
It is a justification of the support it gave to the Dionysiac Choir. 
— The dat. x^P^^ governed by fSo-jOeiaVy is of the same kind as 
those noticed on 670 a 2. (See Appendix to Bk. II.) 

a 5. o (TvWoyos 6 TOLovTos i uot specially the assembly spoken 
of at 666 b 2 (of those over thirty), but any symposium, whatever 
the age of its members might be. 

a 6. €7rt fxaXXov : cp. Hdt. iv. 181 ctti Be p-aXXou lov e? to 
depfiov ... In this phrase p,dXXov seems (ungrammatically) to 
have taken the place of ttXcov (cp. Gorg. 453 a), which is both 
adv. and adj. In A there is an erasure mark of three letters after 
TTocreios ; perhaps the scribe wrote eVt by mistake, and crossed it 
out. Eusebius has €Tt ; he also has act for the nonsensical vulgate 
ct afer /xdXXov. A has ei with an erasure mark and a " star " 
before it. 

b 1. All recent editors, except Stallb. and the Ziirich edd., 
follow Eusebius here in reading Xcyouivoiv instead of the MS. 

333 



671 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

ytyvofikviov. — Badhain says irepi is not Greek here ; that it ought 
to be fTTi. 

b3. Cp. 645 d 6 ft". 

b 4. Cp. 649 a 4, and for Trappi^a-ia 649 b 3. 

b 5. ,The question of the claim to be ap')(U)v did not come up 
before, but it is pertinent to the present subject. 

b 8. ^apev : at 666 b 7 ff. 

b 10. fxaXOaKOiTepas : Eusebius has /xaAaKwrcpas here, as the 
MSS. had at 666 b. It is natural that the expression should 
slightly vary in the repetition. 

C 1. Heindorf, on Gorg. 479 c (ap* ovv crv/x/SaLvei fxeyicrrov 
KdKov dSiKia ;) quotes this passage as an instance where elvat 
" subaudiri potest " with crvpLfSatveLv, this ef^at being expressed 
at Farm. 134 bl ; the participle is also admissible with crvfifSaiveiv, 
and 6V is to be "understood," as H. says, at Euthydem. 281 e. 

C 2. TovTOv 8' eTvat ktX. : it was not said at 666 b that the 
lawgiver was to be tlie TrXda-Ttp. Indeed the nearest approach 
to the mention of any TrAacrrr/s was the statement that the ^vx^s 
rjOos of the mature man would grow evTrkaa-roTepov under the 
influence of wine. But the process of moulding implies the 
moulder. The analogy between the symposium of the young, as 
described at the end of Bk. I., and the Chorus of Dionysus, is to 
be seen in the fact that the dyaOos vo/xoOerr^s, through the agency 
of the sexagenarians, is to stand to the third chorus in the same 
relation as the ruler of the feast stood to the symposium of the 
young. 

C 3. iocnrep tor^, coming after or' '^crav veai, evidently means 
" as in their youth." (Ast suggested ocnrep ; the old vulgate was 
ovrrep.) In Bk, I. the voixo$€Ty]s is appealed to, and referred to 
as arranging the education of the young — e.g. at 647 a, 648 a, 
649a. — ov v6fxov<i ctVat Set (rv/x7rort/covs, "and from him must 
come laws to regulate symposia." 

C 4. 8vvafM€vov<s . . . kOkXiLV Troteiv : see above on 663 el. — 
Tov is predicative with eveX-n-tv and the other adjectives ; cp. 
730 d 6 6 fieyas dvi^p, and 732 a 2 rov ye /Aeyav dvSpa arofxevov. 

C 6. KoX ovK WeXovTa . . . virofxeveiv, " and will not consent 
to observe order, or be content with what is his proper share 
of silence, speech, drink, and song." — There is a slight zeugma 
in the use of vrropevetv. 

C 8. el(Ti6vTt and elcnrepLTreLv : apparently terms of the athletic 
arena ; Siapaxop-evov (which governs the dat. rw prj KaAw Odppei) 
is quite in harmony, " able to bring a ghampion to hold his own 

334 



NOTES TO BOOK II 671 C 

against." Cp. Sopli. El. 700 eio-fjXGe ttoXXuju apixaTrjXuTijiv 

/X€Ta. 

d 1. Tov kolKXicttov (jiofSov : for the two sorts of fear cp. above 
647 a 4 ff. — Eusebius lias evidently preserved the right reading in 
TOV kolXXlo-tov ; all the existing MSS. have Thv firj kolXXicttov. 
Orelli thought the /xr] was a mistake for 8r] ; probably it was 
merely due to the fir] before koAw just before. — oiovs t' elvac : an 
anacoluthon ; the sentence depending on 8vi/a/xevovs was felt to be 
getting too long, so it goes on as if e^a/xev tov<s vofxovs SvvacrdaL 
had gone before. 

d 2. fMera 8lky]<s : cp. 647 c 7. I think it has the same 
meaning here, " under the inspiration of " or " with the help of 
a right judgement " ; we may perhaps translate, " in the cause of 
right." (Ast and Stallb. translate it merely " ita ut decet^ s. oporteV') 
— detov (jiof^ov : if these words are sound (Stallb., Bdh. and Schanz 
would reject them) — and they do not look like a " glossema,^^ as 
Stallb. calls them — we may translate them, "(which champion), 
heaven-taught fear that it is, (we have called alSios and alGrxvvyj)" 

d 7. (rrpaTrjyovs : at 640 (a be) the a-v/xTroa- ta p\0L were com- 
pared to (TTparr^yoi, here they are so called. — wi/ xiopis : for X^P^"^ 
after its case cp. 947 b OprjviDV Se koI 68vppL<jdv X^P^^ yiyvecrOai. 

d 8. etVai, which goes with 8uv6r€pov^ seems to have been put 
in this place with a view to the rhythm and balance of the 
sentence. (Ast would replace it by TroAe/xetv, Orelli by o/xoo-c 
tevat ; Schanz would reject it.) 

e 1. Toi? virlp i^-qKovra err] yeyovoartv : this information is 
slipped in in a curiously unemphatic way. As to the (rv/xTroo-ia 
held to train or test the characters of the young — the 6p6o)<s 
■TratSaytoyrjdevTa (TVfXTroa-La of 641 b 1 — we are not directly told, 
though it is implied, that the (rvpiiroo-iapyoi are to come from the 
mature class. So here the o-v/xTroo-ia of the mature class are 
naturally presided over by men of an older age than they. 

e 5. Perhaps we may conclude that it is the regulation of 
the p-kOrj (roiavTr] pXv pkOrf) which is to bring the advantage 
(iacfiiXrjOevTcs) : while it is the fun and enjoyment (TratSta), that 
is to preserve the sweetness of temper which will ensure that the 
a-vpTTorai part greater friends than before. 

672 a 1. Se MSS. : this clause conies in awkM^ardly by way of 
contrast to a clause which is itself a contrast to the one 1 efore it, 
but Ast's change of 8e to re does not mend matters, o-vyyevo/xcfot 
Kol aKoXov^y^o-avres ktX. is just as awkward an addition if coupled 
by T€ to o}<f>€XrjO€VT€<i and <^IXol. These last two words describe 

335 



672 a 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the result of roiavry] f^^di], with tolovtol (Tv^TroTai^ but the 
former are really an explanation of what is meant by tolovtol. 
It is because the o-v/xTTOTat are law-abiding and docile that the 
good results follow. I have therefore ventured to change 8e to S-^, 
and have put the comma after o-vyyei^o/xevot instead of after 
aKoXov9y]a- avTes. The clause might then be translated, " the 
reason being that they had played their part in the meeting 
throughout in accordance with rules, and had obeyed whenever 
those who were sober issued commands to those who were not." — 
Ast's further emendations of oTrore to otttj ttotc, and d<f)r)yoLVTo 
(for which L and have a<^LKOLVTo) to v(f)r]yoLVTo, as " Platonic," 
seem to me probable, particularly the latter. Perhaps, however, 
d(f)7]yoviJLaL was preferred here, as being the military term, to keep 
up the metaphor of crTpaT-qyot, at 671 d 7. — avvova-Lav crvyyLyve- 
crdaL is a variety of o-vvovcrLav crvvelvaL, to which fTvv6hov<5 a-vvtkvaL 
at Sym-p. 197 d 2 is a close parallel. 

a 4. Cleinias recurs to the doubt which Megillus and he hinted 
at 639 c and e. — For A's etT/ and A^ have knl (the latter supra 
versum) ; from this mere misreading arose the vulgate €117 eirl 

TOLaVTT) (or Tjj TOLaVTJj). 

a 5-b 1. fMT) TOLvvv . . . Aex^ev, " we can now see that it was 
a mistake, in dealing with the gift of Dionysus, to condemn it 
absolutely as a bad thing, which no state would tolerate. Indeed 
there is more still that might be said on the subject, but I should 
hesitate to mention in public the very greatest boon which he 
confers, because most men, when it is mentioned, misjudge, and 
misconceive it." cVet in a 8, whether explained by supposing the 
ellipse of a preceding " but it is no good," or whether we give it 
the meaning " though " claimed above for cVetS^ at 669 b 6, has 
in effect here an adversative force, and may be represented by 
" but." What follows is mainly an instance of the wrong-headed- 
ness of the multitude, though it leads up to a defence of the gift 
of Dionysus. — iKdvo and eVt refer to 638 cd and e; aTrAws 
corresponds to the ev9v^ prjOkv of 638 c 3 and the evdvs of d 2. 

b 3. By calling the story a (^^/^^ he implies that it had in 
men's minds the sanction of religion. — viroppel vrws, " is current in 
some quarters." 

b 4. SL€cf)opt]6y] . . . 8€8a>pr]TaL, " was deprived of the use of his 
wits. That is why he inflicts on us Bacchic possession with all its 
frenzy and dancing — he wants to take vengeance on somebody ; 
and is is from a desire for vengeance that he has given us 
wine to produce this madness." Then, with a "heaven help 

336 



NOTES TO BOOK II 672 b 

their profanity ! " he explains that this very tendency to frenzied 
motion which is stimulated in later life by wine is the naturally 
implanted human instinct out of which springs the highest of all 
arts, fjLovcTiK-q. — Where is the "senselessness" and the "silly 
exaggeration " which Bruns {Plato's Gesetze, p, 50) finds here, with 
Zeller's help ? — I do not even see the " Mangel an Klarheit des 
Ausdrucks " which Ritter feels bound to admit. — Euripides, in the 
prelude to the Cyclops, makes Silenus, addressing Dionysus, speak 
of the time yjvik' efifiavrj's "Hpas vtto . . . (px^v. — Elsewhere Plato 
speaks of the tJ^os ^vxrjs {Rep. 400 d), the 6\pL<s xpvxrjs {Rep. 519 b), 
and the oufxa {j/vxrjs {Rep. 533 d), though not of the yviofxr] xpvxrjs 
(or the vovs ^^XV^) > -^^^ ^W- ^^^ Lucretian mens animi (iv. 758). 

b 5. Ttts T€ /?a/<;(€tas kol iraxrav ttjv fiaviKrjv ^o/oetav : cp. 
Symp. 218 b 7rdvT€<? yap KCKOiVOiv-JKaTe Trjs (faXocrocfiOV /xavtas T€ 
Ktti fSaKX^f'Oi's. (L, 0, and A^ have e/xfSdXXeiv ; if this were to be 
adopted, we ought to have S^Sayprja-daL in the next line.) 

b 6. oOev is best taken as referring to Tipaopovp^evos, not to the 
original St€<^o/3>^ ^7^ Trjv yv(jjp.r]v ; Dionysus Mas supposed to have 
compassed the maddening of men by wine out of revenge — others 
should be mad, as well as he. 

b 8. TO 8e TocrovSe olSa ; cp. 644 e 1 roSe Sk tcr/xev, where also 
he is dismissing fancy in favour of fact. In both cases the fancy 
and the real picture have some traits in common. Here there is a 
distant analogy between the state of the infant whose yvutfxrj has 
not yet developed, and that of the God, who has lost it ; in both 
cases too there is a possession which leads to gesticulations and 
cries. 

C 4. Trav fxaLveraL, " is quite mad " ; irav is not, as Stallb. says, a 
mere repetition of that at c 1 {ttolv ^(^ov). — oVav OLKTacvcocrrj lavro 
rdxtcTTa, " as soon as ever he gets on his legs." 

C 6. yvpvaa-TLKTJs — not, so far, mentioned by name, in spite of 
the €(fiap.€v — is here used probably in the limited sense of the 
part of xoptia which consists of bodily movement — at all evnts it 
refers mainly to the bodily training which this demands. 

d 1. Cp. 654 a 7 and 665 a 6.— The use of hSeSioKevai, " yield," 
suggests the view that the instinctive motion is the soil, so to 
speak, in which the sense grows, which is to reduce dra^ia to 
Ta^ts. 

d 2. The MS. ^ewi/, which with difficulty could be made to 
mean "from among gods," is very awkward, and I have followed 
good Dr. Hagenbutte (Cornariu*) in substituting tovtiov for it. 
This may be taken to refer in particular to pvO/xos and apfiovia, 

VOL. I 337 Z 



672 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

or (better) generally to the course of events, or process, just 
described. Ritter, reminding us that at 653 cd we were told 
that the gods had appointed the Muses and Apollo and Dionysus 
to share men's feasts, proposes to read vtto decov — F.H.D. would 
read /xera Ocmv — but the sentence wants rovroiv. 

d 5. Kol 8rj Kal . . . lar)(vos, "so it comes to this, it seems: 
while the other people's story has it that wine has been given out 
of spite towards mankind, to make us mad, the account we have 
now given represents it as a specific given in quite the opposite 
spirit — as a means whereby our souls may win modesty, and our 
bodies health and vigour." — "An excellent summary of our 
discourse," says Cleinias. 

e 5 ff . 6Xr) fjbev . . . <f)0}vrjs KLvr)(TL<5 : Ath. " We said above," 
(654 a 9) "did we not, that \op€ia as a whole was nothing more 
nor less than TratSevcns, and further, that one half of \opeLa, that 
which concerns the voice, was a matter of pvOfxoL and ap/jLovtai ? " 

CL "Yes." 

Ath. " And we found that pvOjxos was not confined to the 
movement of the voice (up and down) but was shared by the 
movement of the body, though crx^p-o. (gesture and posture) 
belonged to bodily action alone ; while in the other part the 
movement of the voice is tune." — In other words, there is a clear 
analogy between the two halves of the subject, inasmuch as more 
than one of the same terms have to be applied to both. 

673 a 3 f . I have unhesitatingly followed Burnet in adoj^ting 
Ritter's emendation of the MS. 7rpo<i dpeTr]S TratSeiav into irpos 
dpeTrjv TraiSeias : in that case ttJs of course belongs to TratSetos. 
Not only, as Ritter says, do we thereby get a real antithesis to the 
following /x6^/3t rrj<i rov crajparoq dperrj<i, but 643 e tyjv Trpos 
dperrjv €k TraiSojv iraiSetav furnishes us with a confirmatory 
parallel. 

a 4. ovK 018' ovTLva rpoTTov is a kind of apologetic qualification 
of the term applied — as we might say, " for want of a better term " ; 
lit. we used the term "m a sense." 

a 7. a Trat^ovroyv opxrjcnv eiTrofxev, " which we termed sportive 
dancing." 

a 9. 'ivT€Xvov dy(Dyrjv eVt : here we have the Greek for 
" technical education." — Itti to tolovtov avrovy " towards such a 
condition of it " (i.e. of the body). 

a 10. Schanz follows Bekker, Ast, and the Ziirich editors in 
adopting from some inferior MSS. Tr/oocretTroyaei/. Except at 672 c 
the word yvfivaa-TLKij has not been used in this connexion. The 

338 



NOTES TO BOOK II 673 a 

subjunctive means " I propose to call," and may well be right 
here. 

b 2. /cat vvv ouTws elprjcrdit} is equivalent to " and this I would 
now repeat." 

b 7. TTorepov rj/JLU)v, " either the one or the other of us " ; cp. 
VLKi]crdvT(Dv Se TroTepujv at 628 b 7. 

d 1 flf. The same metaphor of parentage runs through the 
account of both origins. The animal instinct of movement, 
impregnated by the human sense of measure, conceives and gives 
birth to 6p)(r]cris as their offspring. Again, when song awakens 
the sense of rhythm, their union produces " all the deliglits of 
Xopeca {)(^op€Lav Kat TratStav is a hendiadys. — A 2 has TracSecav, 
which squares with 672 e 5, but — pace Ritter — is out of place 
here) ; KocvwdevT then agrees with /zeAos and pv6p.6<i. (Ast, 
followed by Schanz, alters the text to to Se iik\o<i . . . tov pv6fjLov 
on the ground that Plato must have meant, after saying that the 
sense of pv6p.6s had produced opxyjo'f'S, to say that the same 
pvOix6<s '(" saltationis lex ") had produced song, or tune, and then that 
the two together had produced xopeta. Bnt this is dictating to 
Plato's fancy. He does not choose to describe the birth of /xeAos, 
and if he had wished to do so, he would hardly have used the 
words vTTofJiLiJivy(TK€Lv and kydpeiv — words which imply that their 
object had l^een born already.) 

e 3. COS ovcrrjs cnrovSrjs, " iis if it were a matter of public 
interest" ; the words are opposed to ws TraiStot at e 8. 

e 5. I have followed Burnet and Schanz in adopting Eusebius's 
reading p.€.\krrj for the MS. p.€XkTri<i. ixiXkry xpMpkvrj is a 
periphrasis for ^ue/Verwo-a, and corresponds to p.rj\avu)p.kv'q in e 7. 
The simjjle xpoopevrj subordinated to \p7](r€Tai would be very 
bald. — Kol rdv aWuiv rjSoviov p,rf d^e^crat (jjcravTOiS : this is an 
important and significant addition. It reveals the author's view 
that for the purpose of liis treatise it is enough to take one 
instance as an illustration of a principle. This he develops in 
detail, and is content to omit the others, with the indication that 
their treatment would be analogous. Here e.g. he goes on to say 
that the same line of treatment will show that a state ought to 
employ the same treatment to all the other tempting pleasures 
(see above on 632 e and 672 e). 

674^1' /^^t' €7rLTrj8€VjxdT(i)v ihvTLViovovv aXX(x)v, "and add to 
this any other indulgences" (Jowett). This must be the meaning 
of these words, though they can hardly make good their position 
in strict logic. The fact that a state allows proceedings which 

339 



674 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

encourage other kinds of vice is no reason why fxedrj should be 
banished ; the full statement, of which this sort of parenthesis is 
a hint, would be : " and if any other practices are treated in the 
same loose way, I should equally vote against them." 

a 3. €TL fiaXXov rr)? Kp. Koi AaK. xpeias, " going even beyond 
the Cretan and Lacedemonian usage." 

a 4. With irpocrOeifiijv Ast and Stallb. understand Trjv xf/rjcfiov 
from above, and all interpreters follow them. But I cannot help 
thinking that we ought to take TrpoorOetfirjv av rw vo/xw exactly as 
we must take koI Trpoa-TLdyixt ye tw vo/xw at Rep. 468 b, i.e. " to the 
Carthaginian law that on campaign nobody is ever to taste this 
drink, but (that men) must during all such period be water- 
drinkers, I would add, not only that at home too no slave, male 
or female, should ever taste wine but, that even the magistrates, 
etc." For one thing, I think that just after rt^et/xTyy av TavTrjv 
TYjv \prj(f)0Vy if he had meant to recall the phrase, he would not 
have used the compound with irpocr- but the simple verb ; but my 
main reason for preferring this interpretation is that it suits the 
context far better than the other. 

a 5. Kap)(^r]SovL(Dv : Bruns (p. 51) finds in this a direct con- 
tradiction of what was said about Carthaginian drunkenness at 
637 d. But surely it is just the drunken nation which would find 
such a regulation imperative in war time. E.g. the vodka pro- 
hibition in Russia in 1914. 

b 2. ivepyovs ovras, " when on duty." 

b 4. el /XT] o-(o/xa(rK'ia5 i^ v6(t(dv cv€Ka : i.e. "unless by trainer's 
or doctor's orders." 

C 1. Eusebius's dfnrekioviov is an improvement on the a/xTrcAwv 
of the MSS. and Stobaeus. 

C 2. ov8' -QTLVL : for 6(ttls in the sense of ocrrLorovv (after a 
negative) cp. Hipp. Mai. 282 d rovTiov 8' eKarepo^ ttAcoi' apyvptov 
diro (TO(f)La<s etpyaaTai rj aAAo? Syjpiovpyos duf) ■^(ttlvos Te^vqs 
(M'here there is a virtual negative). — raKra Se ktA. : i.e. among 
other ordinances for regulating agriculture would be one for con- 
fining wine-growing within very modest limits. 



APPENDIX A 

671 a 1-4. As I have said above, in a note on the Analysis 
of Bk. I., I regard the disquisition on fiWr] in that book as 
a general introduction to the subject of education, and the 

340 ] 



NOTES TO BOOK II 671 a 

moral effects of y)8ovr] and XvTrrj. After the nature of the educa- 
tional process has been clearly described at the beginning of 
Bk. II. (653 a-e), Plato proceeds to deal specially with /xovo-ik^, 
and the relation to it of the gift of Dionysus. Among the young, 
we had been told, the benefit of the gift might be found in a 
properly conducted symposium : among the mature and elderly, it 
is to be found in the Choir of Dionysus. After describing the 
constitution of the latter, he now, at 671a, turns to consider its 
applicability to the work of education, and in so doing he recalls 
(671a — 672 d 10) the main points of the former disquisition on 
fxWrj as a possible cTrtrr^Scv/xa dp€Trjs. 

We may well fancy that when Plato wrote 643 a 4-7, .the 
words iikxpiwep av rrpo^ tov Oebv dcf>iKY]TaL had for him a double 
meaning : that, to the Athenian's hearers the word Oeos merely 
stood — and was meant to stand — for oLvo<i ; but that the author 
had in mind the subject of the third chorus. Whether this was 
so or not, the words express so well what I conceive to be the plan 
of the division of the subject that I will quote them in full. 
They are : TrpioTov Srj ovv irpos tov Xoyov opia-^ix^da TratSetav tl 
TTOT IcttXv Kol TLva SyvafiLV €;(€f 8ta yap ravTrjs <f>ajx€v Irkov 
uvai TOV TrpoK€\€ipi(Tp,kvov kv T(^ vvv \6yov v(f) ^fxcjv, ixk\piT7€p 
dv 7r/)os TOV Beov d(j>LKr)TaL. Dr. Ivo Bruns {Plato's Gesetze vor 
und nach ihrer Herausgabe durch Philippos von Opus) holds that 
the tractate in Bk. I. on the possible use of fiWr] as an eTTLT-qSev/xa 
alSovs (646 a — 649 c), and the suggestion of a Chorus of Dionysus, 
with all the discussion of TratSeta and fiova-LKi^ preliminary to it, 
were written at different times, and with totally different views : 
— that they can never have been intended by their author to form 
parts of the same treatise — that indeed they contradict each other 
in several important point". Also that the section of Bk. II. from 
671 a 4 (TKoiru)pL€.da to 672 d is a clumsy attempt on the part of an 
editor to bring the two discussions into harmony ; and that all 
references, in the second book, to the treatment of jxkdrj in the 
first (eg. 666 c koX ovtws . . . pikv 817, 659 c rplrov 1) rkraprov) as 
well as all passages in Bk, I. which might seem to look forward to, 
or lead up to the main discussion of Bk. II., were inserted into 
the text by the same editor — equally clumsily. Bruns's examina- 
tion of these and other parts of the Laws is very searching, and is 
written with great ability, and is indeed a very helpful guide to 
the understanding of many parts of the treatise. His arguments 
are powerful, and both the destructive and the constructive ^ parts 
^ E.g. his view that the bulk of Bk. II. originally formed part of Bk. VII. 

341 



671 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

of his book, if they are to be satisfactorily confuted, would need 
answers far too long to be given here. I can only say here that 
I am not convinced by them, and that I think the general line of 
the defence against his criticisms is this : i.e. that the train of 
thought in Plato's dialogues often winds about in such unexpected 
ways, that different readers arrive at quite different views as to 
the importance to be assigned to different sections, and as to the 
way in which each section was intended by its author to serve as a 
contribution to the main argument. Often indeed it is impossible 
to secure agreement as to what the main argument was intended to 
be. On these grounds I do not accept as final Bruns's stateuients 
that the author of such and such a passage evidently meant to go 
on in a different way from that in which the treatise proceeds, or 
that it is logically impossible that Plato could have taken subjects 
in the order in which he seems to have arranged them. Also 
there seem to me to be analogous points in the two /xeOi] discussions 
to which Bruns is blind. 



APPENDIX B 

672 e 1— 673 6 2. The subject of xopda falls into two halves : 
(1) the training of the (ear and) voice, and (2) the training of the 
body in rhythmic movement. The first part Plato here calls 
fMovcTLK-j, giving the word a more restricted sense than usual ; the 
second he calls yvixvaa-TLKnj, though he does not imply thereby 
that the sole object of yvixvaa-riK-q is the training for yopeia. 
The first half of the subject, he says, has been fully dealt with : 
of the second, though it has not been left out of sight, the treat- 
ment has been inco:iiplete ; sliall he complete it now ? Are we, 
i.e., to have, side by side with the description of the eVrex^os^ 
aywy?) kirl ixovcrtKyjv, a com^^anion picture of the technical training 
best adapted for the bodily half? — Trepavoujjiev, ttJ Kat eacro/xei'; 
. . . Acyw/xev, r) ttws Kat ttt^ TroLrjrkov ; What old blue gets tired 
of boating " shop " ? There is nothing the two Dorians would 
like better than a long talk about gymnastic training, but the 
Athenian — or at all events Plato — does not mean to indulge 
them. In acceding to their request he tells them they know it 
all already, and then he begins the subject in such a way as to 
hint that his treatment of it is to follow the lines of the discussion 
of the training in fiovcrtKij. Then, with a repeated promise to 
go on hardly out of his mouth (to Se Tretpaa-ofxeda e^e^r^s 

342 



NOTES TO BOOK III 6^2 6 

SteXOelv), lie abruptly breaks off ; if they do not mind, he says, he 
will first dismiss the subject of lawful jxedrj by a final recapitula- 
tion. To the subject of gymnastic training he does not return 
until the seventh and eighth Books. Ritter agrees with Bruns 
tliat the explanation of this silence is that the treatise is here 
incomplete, though he does not follow Bruns in his theory of an 
editorial dislocation of Plato's arrangement. Stallbaum, on the 
other hand, in spite of the following Tret/aacrd/xe^a €<f)€^rjs SteX-Oetv^ 
holds that in 673c9-d5 we have the promised disquisition on 
gymnastic training. I would suggest that the best explanation 
of Plato's silence is that he never intended to write this dis- 
quisition at all. At 632 e he told us that the treatment of the 
€7rLTr]8€v/j.aTa which would foster one virtue would serve as a 
TrapaSeiyixa for the treatment of those belonging to other virtues, 
and then he stopped in his career after one virtue had been 
discussed. In the same way here he makes the conversation turn 
from the subject proposed when enough has been said to show 
that there is no need to pursue it further. 



BOOK III 

In Books I. and II. we have been considering, under various 
guises, the relation of Law to the Individual — how it acquires 
authority, and how it helps to discipline the character through the 
action of pleasure and pain, desire and fear. We now pass abruptly 
to the political frame-work within which, and upon which Law 
acts. 

676 a 1 -c 8. Ath. " Now that we have settled that question, I 
should like to ask ivhat is the most elementary form of a state ? — 
The easiest and best way to discover this is to examine the 
(question in the same way as we examine a state to see whether 
its progress is towards perfection or towards ruin." 

CI. " How is that ? " 

Ath. " Why, by taking an immensely long period of time, and 
observing the changes that take place in it." 

CI. " What do you mean exactly ? " 

Ath. "You see, states have existed, and men have lived as 
members of them for a quite incalculable length of time. — You 
can say how long ? " 

CI. " I cannot." 

Ath. " You may call it an unlimited time ? " 

343 



676 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

CI. " You may." 

Ath. " Don't you think myriads on myriads of states have 
come into being during this time ? and, whatever the amount, 
have not an equal number of states ceased to be ? Have they not 
severally exhausted all kinds of constitution many times over ? 
Have they not sometimes grown from small to big, and sometimes 
sunk from big to small ? — changed too from good to bad, and 
from bad to good ? " 

CI. " It must have been so," 

Ath. " Now I want, if I can, to get hold of the thing that 
caused all this transformation ; for I expect that would reveal to 
us the secret of the birth and change of states." 

a 1. Cp. Plut. Demosth. ch. 4 Kal ravra fxev Tavrrj, Kara 
IIAaTwva. — TToAtreias 0Lp)(rjv : for this expression he substitutes 
at c 8 TTjv TrpioTrjV {tQ>v TroXiTetwv') ykvcdLV koX ixeTa/Sacnv : the 
object of his search is what perhaps in modern phrase we might 
call "the secret of political vitality." 

a 6. jxeTa/SaLvova-av : many editors have been inclined to think 
Boeckh right in reading yuera^atvovcrcov. — Badham wrote it so 
independently. Ast and Schanz adopt the change. Perhaps, 
though, Plato preferred the rhythm of the slightly irregular 
expression. After all it is not straining language much to talk of 
the advance of a state being transformed in the direction of perfec- 
tion, instead of saying that the advancing state is so transformed. 

a 8. That is, the point of view from which we must examine 
the question must be one which takes in an immense expanse of 
time, and all the transformations which occur in it. — fxi^Kovs re 
Kal a-Kctpias : a hendiadys for aireipov fLrJKov<s. 

b 7. I think the tovto ye in the next line shows that Stallbaum 
is right in taking to Se ye ktX. to mean, " but you can be sure of 
this much (can't you), that it must be a hopelessly immeasurable 
time " ? He makes to the article to the (o§ clause. Hermann, 
Schneider, Schanz, and Burnet rightly make the sentence a 
question. Ast and Heindorf take ws as ^^ perquam" as in (05 w/xa 
at Grat. 395 b. — Schanz preserves the aireLpov of A as against 
the anXeTov of L, 0, and most modern editors. 

C 1. For 7rao-a«», "all kinds ofy" cp. 637 a 3 dvoia 7rd(rrjj 
688 c 6 Trdorrj KaKia. 

c 6. Trept : Ast on this passage, and Heindorf on Phaedr. 270 c, 
have collected instances of the " redundant " Trept, where the 
simple gen. might have stood. It is especially frequent with 
aiTta. Cp. also 664 a tovtov 8e irept irda-av ixr]\avrjv evptcTKeLV, 

344 



NOTES TO BOOK III 676 c 

and 678 a 3. — el Swai/xeOa : less confident than i]v ^vvbiixeSa^ 
almost wistful in tone. The line of thought here followed is this : 
if we can find what is the cause and nature of the true develop- 
ment of a state, i.e. of its progress towards perfection, we shall learn 
what is the first principle or vital force which brought it into 
being. A practical application of this knowledge is described at 
683 b; it will enable us to decide what laws are suitable for a state. 

C 9. With TrpodvfjL€Lcrdai a7ro</)atvo/A€i/ov we m^y usefully com- 
pare (rvvT€Lvai 7r€Lpii>fMev&u 8ry Acocrat in a very similar sentence in 
641 e; it is a more direct expression than the TrpoOv/xeccrdaL 
d7ro(f>aLve(T6aL which seems more natural to us. 

6yy3i5. Among many passages from ancient writers which 
speak of wholesale destruction of life by some physical catastrophe 
Ast cps. Polit. 270 c 11 <f)Oopal rolvvv e^ dvdyKyjs tot€ jxkyKTTat 
(rvfi/SaLvova-L twv T€ aAAwv ^wwv, /cat Si] kol to twi/ dvOpioTnov 
y€i/os oXtyov n TrapaXeiTreTat. There is no need, with Boeckh, 
to put in rh before rtov dvOpioTrcov in the present passage. Among 
other slight variations between the two passages, in the Pol. he 
says " the human race survives in a mere fragment " ; whereas 
here he says, " only a very few representatives of mankind sur- 
vive." Cp. Rep. 363 d TratSas yap TraiScov <f>ao-l Kal yevos 
KaTOTTiorOev A€t7r€cr^at tov octlov Kal €v6pK0V. 

a 8. vo-qa-uj/jiev : voeu) does not (as in Ep. viii. 352 c voTja-are 8i 
d Aeyo) vvv) mean turn one's attention to, ponder, think about, but is 
"let us suppose," I have therefore put a ( — ) after yevopevrjv ; i.e. 
the speaker meant to add a secondary predicate to ravr-qv, perhaps 
in the form of a on or ws clause. The interruption of Cleinias's 
question enables him to change the subject of the ws clause from 
avTrj {rj <pdopd) to ot tot€ 7r€pL(fivy6vT€<s. 

b 2. I think we may include ev KopvcfiaL<s in the picture 
suggested by ^uyirvpa, as well as in the statement of fact about the 
surviving herdsmen ; the speaker is thinking, perhaps, of the 
seemingly tiny flashes from heath or forest fires seen on distant 
mountains. There is moreover a special appropriateness in the 
metaphor, since water puts out fire, and water was the destroying 
medium in the catastrophe. 

b 5 ff. " To say nothing of the other resources of civilization, of 
course such men as these can know nothing of all the tricks devised 
by dwellers in cities to over-reach or eclipse or otherwise damage 
each other." The rdv before Iv rots da-na-L is masc. — otherwise 
the 7rpo5 aAAT^Aovs and the iTrtvoova-tv would be harsh : fxyjxaviov 
has to do without an article, for, if it had one, twv would occur 

345 



677 b 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 
too often.-It is even possible that^the^first ^^ ';^:^''''^:'Z 

^r'"t To U- b^r-ln le°rtter of" (cp. 774^4, 809 e 7, 
tlZ iTsl tke on ext better, and it provides a good construc- 
f fn ' the aniecedeut of o.6aa. Cobet ops. S,nnp. 188 b, and 

It^Sra^d „x-t.-oE I. ™« acr^^cr. i. e.nwalent to 

" ";'f tir""" -av - take it ? " So 860 c ^, X^,o..a xr^.r. 
(Sclln/:Si sttbstHute ^^,.^ fo. ^cS/^.v here and at c 3, 

'TXalr \ co,-rec.ed by A^ to ap8,., >vhich is the reading 
of L bid Eus. ; an instructive mistake on the part of A. Cod. 

Voss also -^ VJ.-^ ,,^ ,,,a ,,, „ot, all implenrents to be 

c4-7. we -i' ,„,^i„Vable contrivances of statesmen or other 
destroyed and all serviceable contn j j j^^^ to 

experts to disappear entirely at that «"»to^- ^^j^,^ 

^^^^^'^'^^ifrhrcartr;— S n'crthe sfnie.-in 

::tSVwrh::^:i:e n;:ior> of p.o/e.i; or pm-poseful activity ; 

-e1!d^; Burnet has --^l^Tr /"lyTC l^.eiu!;! 
inattiibnting-. . ^J^ .it ^.is divisi/n. B. has also 
translation, ^i«>""«' J'^^ ^n^„3 .^,„5, i,, A (and which, from 

placed rt'V^'"' X * been either omitted or changed) at the 
MS. days downwards, has '^^n eitne ^^^^^ .^^ 

head of Cle mass ~; Jl -^ »^a S^, g^,,„,, ^^ ^^^^^ 
Burnet's reading of th p.i.^g r th ^^^^ ^^^ ^.^.^.^^^ ^^ 

the first yeyoi'Si'. But it is noi o J Interpret^ations have 



NOTES TO BOOK III 677 c 

then living " (i.e. after the flood) " knew nothing of them " (i.e. were 
uncivilized), " and that, one or two thousand years ago — a mere 
yesterday, you may say — this discovery was revealed to Daedalus, 
that to Orjtheus, etc." 

d 1. TovTo : for a somewhat similar use of a neuter demon- 
strative cp. the adverbial use of tovto "in that case" at 684c 1 
and Tu?Ta at 700 d 1. 

d 5. H. W. Moss, in an article on the use of ws cVos etVeiv, 
pointed out that the phrase here qualifies TrayLivroAAa, and that, 
consequently, the comma which has hitherto stood alter that 
word ought to come after etVeti^. 

d 7. api(TT . . . OTL Tra/^eAtTres, " it is very nice " (i.e. modest) 
"of you to leave out ..." A and read ap' iott', which most 
editors content themselves with altering to ap' oI(t6\ From the 
margin of Cod. Voss. is reported apta-r'. There seems no other 
way of accounting for ap' tur' except by supposing, as Burnet does, 
that apicTT was the original reading. 

d 9. For Epimenides' date cp. on 642 d. 

e 1. vpA,v : ethic dative. — to) pLy^^aviqixaTL . . . aTrercAeaei/ : a 
comparison of the Schol. on Hes. Op. et Di. 40 f., and Plutarch, 
Conv. Sept. Sap. 157 e (ch. 14) shows that Plato here refers to the 
belief that Hesiod's words about the virtue of "mallow and 
asphodel " set Epimenides on the track of sovereign herljal 
medicaments. 

e 10. Kal Tavra : i.e. there was an eprj/jLia of animals as well as 
of mankind. — (nrdi'ia . . . vefMovcriv . . . ^tJv, "few for their 
pasturers to live on " ; so few that the men who grazed them had 
difficulty in supporting life. The inf. with a-Trdvto^ is of the same 
construction as that with its opposite cKavos. So at Rep. 373 d 
iKavrj Tpi<f)€LV Tov*i TOT€ i) X^P^ €(rTai. — The elvai goes with all 
the accusatives, beginning with kpqpLLav. (This seems better than 
to take dvat as equivalent to e^eivat, as at Theaet. 207 b 4 ; in that 
case /^ovKoAta, yevos and ravra would be governed by ve/xova-cv.) 

678 a 1. TO, TOT€ MSS. : the repetition of tot€ after that 
at e 6 seems strange. I think that we ought to read to Kar dpxd.^ 
here ; cp. 679 a 1 el p.r] tl(tiv Kar' dp\ds lctojs. 

a 3. o)v : for the objective gen. with Aoyo? in the sense of 
about something Stallb. cps. Apol. 26 b . . . dccjv S>v vvv Aoyos 
ecTTLVj and Soph. Ant. 11 p.vBo<i </)tAa)v "tidings about friends." — 
For irept c. gen. instead of the simple gen. cp. on 676 c 6. 

a 4. w9 €7ros etTreiv : this qualifies to Trapdrrav. 

a 9. The vice and virtue spoken of are those of men, not those of 

347 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

institutions referred to at 676 a 5 and c 3 and 683 b. He means, 
as be explains immediately, tbat virtue and vice, like* tbe details 
of civilization, take time to develop, and can only develop in 
tbeir company. How tbis applies to vice is explained at e 6 ff. 
He does not give a corresponding explanation of tbe rise of virtue, 
because a virtuous development (tbe cttiSoo-i? eh apeTy]v) is 
natural. Tbe object of tbe wbole treatise is to sbow how to avoid 
and obviate tbe accidents wbich give rise to vice. 
b 3. O bas rj KoX for r). 

b 6. Tbe (0 of r^ixCiv being in an erasure in A, Scbanz con- 
jectures i^/iiv, — ei's TT. ktA., "tbe world came to be wbat tbe world 
is," Jowett. 

b 9. Kara (T/xiKpov at Prot. 338 e, Soph. 217 d, Rep. 344 a and 
401 c means "in little bits"; bere it is "little by little," as at 
Rep. 407 d, Fhaedr. 262 a, Theaet. 180 e, Theag. 130 c. At Soph. 
241c Kal Kara (TfiLKpov, like tbe following /cai Kara f3pa\Vy 
means "ever so little." 

C 1. 7r^€7r€t : cp. Phaedo 114 d 5 tovto . . . Trpkmiv p.0L SokcI. 
Tbe sense of " to be likely " is not common for Trpkireiv. 

C 3. ""Ei/avAos eleganter dicitur tam de sermone, quo adbuc 
aures personant, quam de re qualibet, cujus adbuc recens est 
memoria," Rubnken, Tim. 

c 5. For kavTov<i in tbe sense of aAA^^Aovs cp. Lysis 215 b, 
Farm. 133 e. 

C 6. €v rots Trepl €K€lvov tov xpovov : tbis bas generally, and 
rigbtly, been taken as an expansion of sucb a pbrase as toL vvv, 
on tbe lines of local expressions like (es) rot €7rt Odrepa, to, €7r' 
€Ketva, (ets) to eir CKCtva, to ctti TaSe, els to. tov aSe/V^ov tov 
kp.ov (Lysias xii. 12). Scbanz, bowever, marks kv toIs as corrupt, 
and Badbam introduces Kaipoh after xp^vov. (Ratber tban tbis 
I would take rots as masc.) — Stepb. altered tbe MS. iropeca into 
wopela, and, as tbere is a gap two letters long in A before tbe 
word, Scbanz admirably conjectured to, iropeta. Tbe to, goes well 
witb tbe TrdvTa in c 8. 

C 7. Tbe totc, to whicb Boeckb took exception, bas tbe effect 
of making tbe loa-re clause (vvbicb Boeckb rejected) tbe most 
significant part of tbe complex sentence. It is as if Plato said, 
" Tbey could not travel to eacb otber as yet, eitber by land or 
sea, because all kinds of vehicles bad been destroyed." — avv 
Tttti; Te^vats : i.e. "as well as tbe arts necessary for tbeir con- 
struction." 

d 1. fXiTaXXela for /xeTaAAa : Lobeck, Paralipp. iv. 10, gives 

348 



NOTES TO BOOK III 678 d 

many instances of nouns and adjectives in -09, -rj, -a, or -ov 
which have alternative forms in -etos, -€ta, or -€tov, and mentions 
this case in that connexion. — crvyKex^/xeva : i.e. "filled up with 
mud," like the "nine men's morris." 

d 2. dvaKadatpea-dat : used, not, as some take it, of clearing 
out the mines, but in its technical sense of extracting metal from ' 

the ore ; cp. on 642 a. There could of course be no possibility of 
doing this if the mines were not accessible. 

d 3. SpvoTOfxtas : abstract for concrete ; " timber," not merely, 
as L. & S., " firewood." (Not " they (had) no means of felling 
timber," as Jowett, but " they were consequently badly off for 
timber.") — A has ttov, ttov ti, Vulg. rt irov. 

d 7. A has av with 87^ as an alternative, and 87^ with av 
as alternative. 

d 8. TovO' ovTios yeyovkvai : i.e. that the miners' art revived. 

e 2. A has Aeyovrat with Seovrai as an alternative, O Seovrat 
with Acyovrat as alternative. 

e 6. The change in the matters spoken about is not so abrupt 
as at first it seems : there was no o-rao-ts, because aa-fxevoc eavrovs 
ewpcov 8t' oAtyoTT^ra ; no war (pai tly) because there was a dearth 
of weapons. Still, the author wishes to add a further result of 
the €p-qfjbia, i.e. that there was enough for all ; also to hint what 
were the chief curses of civilized societies, i.e. money, and lies — 
the unnatural appetite for accumulated wealth, and the loss of 
faith and truth which comes in the train of selfishness. 

679 21 1- yoixrj<s : the following y Su^mv shows that this is not 
to be restricted to the literal sense of pasturage, but, as in the case 
of SpvoTOfxta at 678 d 3, stands for the resulting product, i.e. flocks 
and herds ; so, at Xen. Anab. iii. 5. 2 (i/o/xat TroAAat fSoa-K-qfxdTiDV 
SLaf^ijSa^fxevaL €ts to uepav tov Trora/xov KaT€Xrj<fi67](Tav), vo/xai 
means pasturing herds. 

a 7. ovSe €v : this adverbial use of the emphatic form is 
uncommon. 

b 1. Perhaps it is better to say that the clause rorWco tw rexva 
TTopi^eLv TavTa is the direct object of eSwKc, than to take tw T€\va 
as the direct object, and explain (as Stallb.) iropt^cLv to be = cocrre 

TTOpi^CLV. 

b 2. Totavrrjv diropiav seems to refer definitely to the lack of 
iron, rather than to general distress, such as that caused by the 
flood. (Jowett trans. " when reduced to their last extremity.") 
— fSXaaTrfv kol Ittl^octlv : ftXaaTrf here perhaps means sprouting 
or hirth ; at Phaedr. 251 d it means a nascent germ, or sprout ; at 

349 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Prot 334 a, all that sprouts above ground from a root ; Sophocles 
uses jSXdo-rai of hirth, O.T. 717, Trach. 382, and at O.G. 972 of 
conception. In that case the two words would exactly correspond 
to the yevetrir koX fieTafSacnv of 676 c 8. 

b 3. Sta TO TOiovTov, " that being so." 

b 6. o t6t€ €v eK€LvoL<; TTaprju : Ficinus in his trans, omits these 
words. Wagner concludes that they were absent from some MSS., 
and that the scribe who restored them put them in the wrong 
place. He would place them after ytyvoiT av. Ast puts a full stop 
at oVres, and only a comma after -rraprjv. Cornarius makes these 
words mean "... (were without the gold) which was then among 
them." Some of the difficulty is removed if, with Stallb., we take 
what precedes to be, like the following one, a general statement ; 
not " they would not have been rich," but " men were never made 
rich (who had no gold and silver, and that was the men's condition)." 
(Ritter takes rore and eK€ivoL<s to refer to the period and the men 
of the earlier civilization. before the flood ; but this does not help.) 

b 7. y 8' av ktA., "if a community is to breed the best natures, 
it must admit neither poverty nor wealth : without them no 
blatant oppression can gain a footing, or jealous envy." 

C 1. Stallb. has collected many examples of the way in which 
variety is secured by the substitution of re ... ou for a second or 
third ovre ; this is a step towards the not infrequent ovre ... re. 

C 2 ff . dyaOol fjkv . . . SiiXyjXuOafiev, " last, but not least, among 
good influences was their so-called simplicity. What they heard 
called fair or foul, they were so ' simple ' as to think rightly 
named, and believe really to be so. No one was ' clever ' enough 
to suspect a lie, as do our wiseacres of to-day. What they were 
told about gods and men, they took for true, and lived by it, and 
that is how they came to be just the kind of men we have above 
described." 

d 2. etTrioficv A (and L and 0?); Vat. 1029 reads eiirofxey ; so 
Ficinus and Cornarius, who trans, diximus ; so Ast conjectured, 
and so Schanz reads. The substance of this paragraph is almost 
entirely recapitulatory, so that the indie, may well be right — in 
spite of the /xeWova-LV ctvat "are bound to be." The only novelty 
is the mention of many generations, but this is implied in the 1000 
years of 677 d. 

d 6. Kara TroXiw [loi'ov avrov : if fxovov avTOV is sound, the 
avTov seems to have been added to the Kara ttoXlv with the same 
effect as in hddS' avrov and similar, mostly Homeric, expressions ; 
cp. our "within there," "without there" in Shakespeare. (Ast 

350 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

and Stallb. put the comma before avrov instead of after it, and 
construe it (still with a local meaning) with Aeyo/x€vat. Bdh. reads 
ovo/MaTL for /xovov avrov, also taking it with Atyo/xevat. Ritter 
proposes avrtov (i.e. TroXe/xLKUjv rexvMv) for avrov, H. Richards av : 
of the emendations I prefer the last.) 

e 2. The three comjmratives which follow evr] Oca-repot contain 
the only fresh points in this paragraph. They come in as an 
expansion of the praise implied in the e'^wv Kara ravra in c 7. 

e6. AeAex^w Sr; . . . avrol^, "let what we have said, and all 
the deductions we make from it, be regarded as a means of 
ascertaining how the men of that time came to want laws, and who 
their lawgiver was." 

680 a 4. ro roLovrov : not "such a thing as a lawyer," but 
"such a thing as a law." — For the plur. x/^^^i/ovs cp. below on 
769 c 5. 

a 6. ireptoSov : the cycle that elapses between one natural 
convulsion and another. Plato seems to assume that such con- 
vulsions only occur at great intervals of time. — edecn Kal rots 
X.€yofX€voL^ 7r-arpioL<s i'6[xoi<s : we see from 793 a f. that these 
aypa(f>a vopLLfxa or irdrpioi vopioi are indispensable to a community 
even after written laws have been introduced. The tois Aeyo/xevot? 
(and the ovs dvo/Aa^ovo-tv at 793 a) show that TrdrpLos is to be 
taken as a technical term, in the sense of traditional. 

a 9. " Herein we have already a form of polity " — if we may 
use the word polity in Hooker's sense of political organization. 

b 2. Swacrreiav : jmtriarchy is what we should call this 
particular form of " authority," though Plato hesitates to coin the 
word TrarpLap\La. The important point in his eyes seems to have 
been the fact that authority {Swaa-reia) should attach to any 
position ; hence the term chosen. The leading idea connected 
with the word (cp. Rep. 544 d, Arist. Pol. 1292 b) seems that of 
personal authority. — Kal vvv en . . . Kal ev "EAA. Kal Kara /3ap. : 
this must mean that this personal inherited authority existed in 
some Greek states ; not that they were altogether in the same 
primitive condition as to polity as the Cyclopes. 

b 3. Aeyet 8' . . . oiKy^criv, " Homer, you remember, says it 
was to be found in the way in which the Cyclopes lived." oi'/o^crts 
is not " government," as Stallb. translates it, but it would be hard 
to find a single Englisli word for it here. 

C 2. \apUt<;, "a pretty poet," in the old phrase. 

d 2. TO dp\aLov avro)v eirl rrjv dypLorrjra Std p-vSoXoyia^ 
eivaveviyKiiiv, " wdien, in his jioem, he ascribes their primitive ways 

351 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

to their wild life " ; i.e., Homer, like the Athenian, tells of units 
of population scattered among the hill-tops, and points to the 
necessary consequences of such isolation. 

d 7. 0iKrj(TLv : here the concrete "/lowsg/ioZrf." 

d 8. yevos : the ^^ family " ; not yet the clan into which the 
household grows. — Kara yevos, " in separate families." — vtto dir. 
kt\. gives the reason for SLecnrapfxevMv. airopia^ " dearth" not of 
men, but of ^possessions and implements. 

e 1. iv ah : the antecedent to this relative is, of course, not (as 
Stallb.) cfiOopais, though it immediately precedes, but TroAiTeiat. 
The Ath. does not think it necessary to repeat the words Totavrat 
TToAtreiai ytyvovTac, but they are carried on in sense from his last 
speech. (Ast, followed by Wagner, Hermann, the Ziir. edd., 
Schanz and Ritter read €v ols.) — In this paragraph we pass from 
the single family with the father at the head, to the next genera- 
tion, when the eldest brother takes his father's place and, as it were, 
acts as the " father " of ^his younger brothers and their families, as 
well as of his own. 

e 2. irarpus Kal p.r]Tp6s : I imagine Kat to mean or, and that 
Plato is thinking of cases where authority and j)roperty descended 
through the mother. The same interpretation is possible at 
690 a 3. 

e 3. TrarpovopLOVfxevoL : Timaeus, Lex.., gives two explanations of 
this word : (1) ol tols yoviKols (i.e. handed down from father to 
son) v6p,oi<; \pu)pL€voi, and (2) vivo tcov irarkpuiv dp\6pevoL. The 
latter is most likely the right one, at least for this passage (in 
spite of 680 a 6) ; only the " father " is the father of the tribe, who 
inherits his position from the original father of the family. — We 
may translate the whole paragraph : " And so do there not arise, 
out of these single households and families, whom the dearth 
consequent on the cataclysms keeps in isolation, communities in 
which the eldest rule because they inherit the authority from 
father or mother, and the people follow them, and are soon to be 
found forming one flock, like so many birds, ruled by paternal 
authority, the justest of all titles to royal rank ? " — This is the 
fully developed patriarchy. 

e 6. "Yes, and next, larger numbers (ttAciovs subj.) join 
together to form greater communities such as we may term 
TToAct?." The word ttoXcls seems strangely used of these 
primitive communities. Naber conjectures eTravAei?. If TrdAeis is 
correct, it must be used proleptically. F.H.D. conj. that ttoAcis 
is a mistake for oiKryo-ets due to the adjacent ttAccovs. 

352 



NOTES TO BOOK III 68o e 

e 7. y€w/)yttts : as we use the words " planting " or " plantation " 
for a planted space, so " cultivation " is used here for cultivated 
spaces. 

68l a< 2. T€i\Mv epvfxaTa, "as walls of defence." — olKiav : he 
uses the word otKia, figuratively, for what he has just called a 
TToAi?. At a 7 he calls it an oi'/<?ycrts. 

a 8. Trapetvat . . . €\ov(rav, " should bring with it." 

b 1. oiK€iv : the subj. to this verb is really the eKacrrovs, 
which is not definitely expressed till b 5. — erepa dfj)' krkpMv 
oVtoji/ . . ., "(each) a distinct set, derived from a distinct set 
of . . ." €T€/oa is governed by an imaginary 'i^ovras, agreeing 
with the same e/cao-Toi'S understood. 

b 3. KO(r/jLL(i)T€p(ov . . . dvSpiKioTepa, " the more orderly or 
sf)irited the forbears, the more orderly and spirited would be the 
dispositions of the descendants they had brought up." I think 
KO(TfML(i)T€p(i}v and dvSpLKiov sltb under the government of an 
imaginary a— o, repeated from dcf/ before ere/owi/. (Boeckh un- 
necessarily proposes dv^piKinrkpinv for avS/oi/cwv.) 

b 4. Kara t/oottov here seems to mean "duly," "as was to be 
expected." — ourws, " in this manner," i.e. by descent and training. 
(Or ought we to take oi^tws as "merely," "just," with Kara 
T/aoTTOi/, as in (xttAws oi;tco5 ? In such an idiomatic phrase it is 
hard for us to be certain; "just in the same way" would fit in 
well here.) 

b 5. dTTorvirovfJikvov^ av, "ready to imprint," or "likely to 
imprint." Not only would each contingent bring its own 
traditional manners and dispositions, but it would be sure to 
perpetuate its own preferences in its descendants. — It is surprising 
what a light is let in upon the sentence by Schneider's dv atpeo-ets 
for the MS. dvatpecreLs. Burnet adopts it ; so do Herm. and 
Wagner, though they are pro])ably wrong in taking dv with 
i]KeLv ; it goes much better with aTroTfTrovfievov?. Ast saw part 
of the truth when he proposed to read alpiorets (so Schanz), instead 
of dvaLp€cr€LS. — Ast also proposed ai/ev/aeo-cts, and Winckelmann 
av€vpr](T€L<ij Orelli aet at/aco-ets. Stallb. actually retains dvacpia-eis 
and translates it " ea quae susceperint." 

c 1. Schanz says that A has avrojv, 

C 2. With v(rT€povs we must supply dpecTKCLv. This added 
clause (tovs 8e . . . v(TTepov<s\ which Schanz would eject from 
the text, gives the whole sentence the same effect it would have 
had if 7r/3(oTovs had been put in (predicatively) with vopLovi^ and 
the second clause omitted. — This is exactly the informal way in 

VOL. I 353 2 a 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

which thoughts drop out in conversation. It says, in effect, " I 
don't mean that other people's laws will be positively c?*spleasing 
to them ; only that they will like their own best." (H. Steph. 
wanted to insert the tt/owtods.) 

c 4. oipxV . . . w's €OiK€v : in other words, " is not this, after 
all, how a definite enactment of laws came about ? " — i.e. from the 
necessity of choosing, for the united community, the best out of 
the laws of the clan-units out of which it was formed. If this 
is the right interpretation of these words, it follows that the next 
speech of the Ath. is a development of this idea ; and this view 
is supported by the explanatory yovv added to the adverbial to 
/xerot Tavra. 

C 7. TO yovv . . . lai^Twv, " it is clear that, when the separate 
families had once united to form one community, they " (could not 
go on with different notions in their minds as to what was per- 
missible and what not, but) "would have to choose certain repre- 
sentatives of their whdle body," etc. 

c 8. These kg tvot, or public representatives, would have a 
double task : (1) that of selecting the best from the laivs of the 
several tribes, and (2) that of selecting the best from among the 
rulers of the several clans, to serve for the united state. 

C 9. avTcov : i.e. twv vofxtfjuov. — et? to kolvov (" for the use of 
the community ") goes with what follows. 

C 10. OLOV ^ao-iXevcTL, " with king-like power." (There is no 
need, with Hug, to reject these words.) 

d 1. (fiavepa Set^avTe? : (pavepd is proleptic, " indicate clearly " 
— not, as Schneider and Jowett, " publicly present." — kkka-dat t€ 
SovT€9, " propose for their acceptance " — rather than " give them 
the choice of them," Jowett — implying that it had been settled 
that whatever the kolvol chose would be accepted. 

d 2. Tovs Se : i.e. the lyye/xove? ; ap)(^ovTa<; is predicative. 

d 3. '^ Kai TLva jSacnXetav, " or perhaps monarchy," Jowett. 

d 4. €V ravrrj rfj /j.eTajSoXrj Trjs TroAtTeta? OLKr](TOV(rLV : the 
subject to the verb is still ot, i.e. the kolvol, and it is apparently 
used absolutely, " will direct affairs during this change of 
constitution." Cp. 779 c 6 Kai ocra cvto? TrdAecos . . . irperrov av 
oLKCLv €17;. (Most interpreters take the verb to mean " will live," 
i.e. they supj)ose the subject somehow changed to " the whole 
community." Apart from this change of subject, what a feeble 
end to the paragraph ! " And in this altered state of the govern- 
ment they will live," Jowett.) 

d 6. €(fi€^rj<s, "step by step " ; cp. Polit 281 d tV e(^€^>js -^fxlv 6 

354 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

X.6yo<s dr). — The subj. to yL-yvoiTo may be fxerafSoki], but perhaps 
it is only " things would come about." — Stallb. points out that 
the formula ovrio (re) Kal Tavrrj recurs at 714 d 9, and 947 d 5, and 
ops. Tavrrj Kal Kara ravra 929 c, and 889 c (where ovtojs is 
added). 

d 7. rpiTou TOLvvv . . . ytyvecr^at, "we have yet to mention 
the rise of a third kind of polity ; and at this stage both the 
polities and the cities themselves display complete variety of form 
and history," i.e. the full development of the city in the plain 
brings with it all kinds of activities for its inhabitants, and offers 
facilities of intercourse with the outside world. As a consequence, 
not only do the relations of classes in the city change, but it is 
entangled in conflicts with other cities — sometimes with disastrous 
results. The etSi] refer mainly to the TroA-tTetwi/, the TraO-q/xara 
to the TToAets. 

682 a 1. Aeyet . . . Tavra . . . elprjixeva : such a form of 
expression as Kal ravra Aeywv opOQ>s av rts Xkyoi is common. 
This is a variety of it. An intermediate form would be Kal ravra 
av XkyoL res o/o^a>§ Aeycov. Ast cps. 689 e 1. 

a 2. Kara Oeov ttcos elprjfjicva Kal Kara <f>vcnv : so we might say 
of a biblical story, " It's holy scripture, and, what's more, it's 
human nature." 

a 3 ff . Belov yap . . . cKacrrore, " for poets too, being a heaven- 
born race — a race (specially) inspired at their times of singing, — 
helped by many a Grace and Muse, often reveal the secrets of 
nature " (lit. " seize in many cases on the way in which things 
really happen "). The general sense of this passage is clear, but 
the reading and the exact inter-relation of the words are doubtful. 
Proclus quotes it four times in his commentaries on Plato ; on 
Rep. 393, Rep. 368, Tim. 20, and Rep. 401. The quotations 
respectively are : Oetov yap ovv 8rj Kal ro ironqriKov ov yevos, 
dilov ro TTOLTjrLKOv yevo'i aTroKoAwv, ^etov ya^ ovv 8r] Kal ro 
TTOiijrcKov ka-ri ykvo^, and 6 jikv yap delov (f)r]a-l Kal rb Trot-qriKov 
ivOeaa-riKov ov yevos vfivioSovv. Boeckh, followed by Stallb., 
Herm., Wagner, and Schanz, rejects evOeaa-rtKov as a marginal 
explanation of Oetov by a late commentator (Stallb. suggests by 
Proclus himself), partly, too, because the word ivOeaa-nKos is not 
recorded elsewhere from Plato or any author of his time. As to the 
latter point, Hdt. i. 63 uses cV^eafw, therefore we may conclude 
that (vdeaa-TLKo^ would be perfectly intelligible to Plato's readers ; 
also, perhaps, kvBova-taa-rtKo^ (which Winckelmann proposes to 
read here) had to his mind a slightly derogatory suggestion of 

355 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

" possession " and " excitement," and this may have made him 
choose a less familiar form. (v/xvioSeo) also does not occur elsewhere 
in Plato.) As to the former point I think it is best to suppose 
that Proclus only quoted the evOeao-riKov when he meant to bring 
in the v/xvw8ow as well — and this gives us a hint how to take 
vjxvmSovv. — The other three quotations are not verbal, and the 
point of them lies in the deiou. Heindorf and Badham (who also 
alters vfxvcoSovv to v/xvwSwv) take the Kai as connecting Oetov and 
^vOeaa-TLKoVy and suggest (the former as an alternative to another 
arrangement) that to irot-QTiKov is the "gloss" that should be 
rejected. But Proclus's quotations seem to establish too (i.e. as 
well as other classes of Oecot av8/oes) as the meaning of /<at, and 
moreover v/xvoiSovv, which is rather a difficulty any way, becomes 
more difficult if Kai is and. 

a 7. Tov vvv eTTcA^ovTos r)fJiiv fjLvOoVj^ " in the imaginary history 
which has now occupied our attention." 

a 8. Ta;)(a yap . . .' /^ouA^^crea)?, " it may perhaps give (you) an 
insight into my meaning." (Generally interpreted " tell us some- 
thing about our object^' ; i.e. the discovery of the origin of law.) 
Cp. 668 c 8. 

b 4. €XovTa : loosely used for "in the neighbourhood of." 

b 7. For €v with a measure of time, in the sense of after, cp. 
Phaedo 107 e aAAos Sevpo TrdXtv rjyejxiov KOfii^et ev TroAAais xpovov 
KOL /xa/cpat? TreptoSoLS. 

b 10. yovv, "what I mean is" ; cp. 681 c 7. 

c 1. For vTTo c. ace. meaning (to put or go) "close up to" 
(something above) cp. Rep. 496 d viro Tei^iov aTroo-ras, Lysis 203 a 
■utt' avTo TO Tu^o'i. The mountain streams are naturally supposed 
to be felt as coming down from above. 

c 3. X6<f)0is : the change to the plural after the Xocfiov at b 3 
seems merely due to a desire to vary the expression. 

C 4. Stephanus's emendation of the MS. tl to Tii^a is a certain 
one. The loss of va was doubtless due to the following /xa, and 
the preceding TroAAois' Ttcri xpovots gives the pattern — a very 
common one — for the expression. 

C 6. KaTMKovv : probably here, if not in KaroiKovvras (677 c 2), 
and KaTipKLcrOr) (682 b 2), the Kara- has the meaning of doivn into 
the plain. 

d 6. The rd marks the KaKo. as historical. 

d 7. a-Tacreis : this word introduces us to the stage of violent 
revolution, foreshadowed perhaps in the word TraO-qfiaTa at 681 d 8^ 
and marking a new age, , 

356 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

el. dAA' (oa-T^\ used somewliat loosely, like our "instead of 
that," with a change of subject. 

e 2. oT, " and these exiles " ; for, as at e 4, (f>vyds is used for 
<f>vyd8as. — Ritter is possibly right in taking ttolXlv with KarrjXdov, 
but if it be taken with cKirecrovTes it need not mean " banished 
a second time," but merely "sent away again"; cp. Hdt. v. 72 
where TraAtv k^kTrnne. is said of Cleomenes, when, after occupying 
the Acropolis, he was forced to relinquish it again. (Stallb. takes 
the <f>vyiis to be the exile of the veterans from Troy, and the ot to 
be the veoi who were driven out in their turn (TraAtv) ; but this 
interpretation of the second ot is very harsh.) 

e 4. Ttt? TOT€ (/)vyas : abstract for concrete, i.e. tovs rore 
<jivyd8a<i, which is actually the reading of 0. So at 680 e 7 
yea>/)ytas stands for dypovs. Stallb. quotes Thom. Mag. p. 902 
(fivy-q ' Kol 01 cfivydSes ' OovKv8i8r]<^ iv Trj oySoy [viii. 64], Kal 
yap KOL <f>vyrj avriov €^a> -^v. Cp. also our ^'flights " of birds. — 
TttvTa . . . irdvTa . . . rdvTevSiv, " all the subsequent course of 
these events " — " the rest of the story " (Jowett). — The i'/xei9 is 
emphatic : " you Lacedaemonians" are the people to tell that ; i.e. 
" it is part of Lacedaemonian history." 

e 8. Though in gi'ammatical structure Kar dpxds goes closely 
with e^iTpaTTopLeda.j in idea it belongs to the subordinate participle 
StaAeyo/xevot (not "we turned aside at the beginning while 
discussing," but "we turned aside at the beginning of our dis- 
cussion"). — The difference of tense between the two subordinate 
participles, StaAeyo/xevot and Tre/DtTrecrovTe?, indicates that it is the 
second participle which goes specially with the main verb — and 
further defines the action it describes ; for the main verb is also an 
aorist. — 7re/3t7reo-ovTes has very much the same meaning as Trepi- 
Tvx6vT€s at 683 e 5 — used of chance subjects encountered in a 
discourse or a mental survey. 

e 10. wo-TTc/o Kara ^eov, "providentially" (Jowett). 

ell. Xal3rjv dTToStSwa-Lv : ace. to the scholiast on Rep. 544b 
{tyjv avTr]v XafSrjv 7ra/3€;(€), XajS-q (or Aa/^at, cp. Phaedr. 236 b) 
means the hold or grip which wrestlers get of each other ; so that 
XafSrjv Trapk\€LV or aTToStSoVat is " to allow your antagonist to get 
hold, to get to grips." The application of the metaphor is plain. 
The two antagonists are the personified Aoyos and the Athenian 
— or perhaps the three of them — and they are this time going to 
discuss seriously and exclusively the origin and character of Dorian 
institutions. 

683 a- 1- It is perhaps permissible to wonder whether avTTJv is 

357 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

not a mistake for av. — opdw^ goes with KarotKaxrdaL. — 'icj^are : 
e.g. 626 c, 637 a. — KaToiKelcrOat : Ast is possibly right in thinking 
that this is a mistake for KanaKia-Oai. A and one or two early 
edd. did make the mistake of substituting KarotKyjcrLv for KaroLKLcnv. 
Still KaroiKeia-dai is possible here, if we suppose it said of the 
concrete " settlement," i.e. state of Laeedaemon, which is implied 
in the words KaToiKicTLv els AaKeSaijiova ; the kol K.pyr7]v 
facilitates the supposition. 

a 2. The relation of the added clause kol K/o. ktA. is best 
expressed by putting a ( — ) before it. It does not all of it belong to 
the relative sentence ; though ec^are opOios KaTOLKetcrdai has to 
be supplied with it, the ws a^eXi^ioh v6/xol<; has nothing to do 
with the yjv. (Ast and Schneider take aScAc^ots Kai as equivalent 
to 6/xotot9 Kttt, " with the same sort of laws as Crete.") 

a 4. Sie^eXdovres limits the meaning of TrXdvy {rov Xoyov) 
to the part of it coucerned with the imaginary history. — The 
explanatory asyndeton {eOeacrdfjLeOa ktX.) is common in Plato ; 
cp. 684 a 2, Menex. 239 d 1. 

a 7. TcrdpTrj : the fourth representative polity does not present 
any marked develoj)ment or alteration of internal constitution, as 
compared with the third. The difference is mostly one of size. 
It is a nation of three cities. Also, what is very important for 
the argument, the polity is a real, not an imaginary one. 

a 8. KaTOLKt^o/Jievov T€ TTore Kcil vvv KaTcoKLcrixevov : i.e. not 
only does history show us the formation stage, but we can use 
our own eyes, so to speak, because the foundation has endured 
to the present day. — A and the margin of O have tt/oo vvv 
for vvv ; perhaps they did not understand KarioKLa-ix^vov. L has 
vvv alone. 

b 1. €^ wv a7rdvTU)v : I think it is better to take these words 
with Tt — "what out of all these (political) arrangements," rather 
than " as the result of all this history, or description." For one 
reason, this interpretation provides a natural explanation of avreov. 
— This involves taking KarcoKiorOrj in the sense of established, 
settled, arranged — of a part of the civic establishment. Cp. Tim. 
24 c. (C. Kitter suggests that perhaps Laeedaemon is the subject of 
KaTWKLcrd-)].) — L has et re Kai, A and omit Kal : it adds a useful 
emphasis to SvvdpeOa, and is more likely to have been omitted 
than inserted, so I restore it. 

b 5. This sentence and the following one gain greatly in point 
if, with C. Hitter, we read To.vrd for the MS. rai^Ta — but not with 
his explanation. He takes ravra Xcktcov to mean " we must now 

358 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

go over the same ground, in examining historical fact, which we 
have gone over before, when we were imagining what was likely 
to happen " ; and in the following sentence he finds a cantion that 
perhaps history may contradict their theoretical hypothesis. 
What TavTo, olov l^ ^PXV'^ XeKTeov means is " (if it is within our 
power to tind out something definite about the effect of laws) we 
viust go over the same ground again pretty much from the beginning 
(as the logos seems to suggest that we should)." That is, we shall 
have to ask much the same question that was asked at the 
beginning ; i.e. " Are the Dorian Laws perfect ? " Only then we 
asked " can they be defended in theory ? " now we ask " have 
they worked well in practice ? " 

b 6. kyKaXovfX€.v is most likely fut. The Ath. does not 
want to press the discussion on his hearers unless they express 
themselves as satisfied with what was said before on the same 
topic. 

682 e 8— 683 b 6. "There is a providence in it; here we are 
back again at the same ^^oiiit from which we diverged, near the 
beginning of our talk about laws, when we fell upon the subject 
of Music and drinking-bouts. Here is the argument offering us to 
begin over again, ' as we were ' ; for it has come round to that 
same foundation of the Lacedaemonian state, which you both 
claimed to be correctly ordered — that and Crete, whose laws are 
akin to the- Spartan. Something certainly we have gained from 
the round-about track of the argument, from that part of it, that 
is, in which we reviewed several polities and state-foundations. 
We examined a primitive, a more advanced, and a yet further 
advanced community, following upon each other, as we conceive, 
in order of establishment, through countless ages of time ; and 
here now a fourth state, or perhaps you would prefer to call it a 
nation, presents itself, in the process of acquiring a civic existence 
which has continued to the present day. And if we can get to 
see, not only what of all these arrangements was rightly or 
wrongly established ; but also, what kind of laws and customs 
they are which keep alive the parts of the polities which 
survive intact, and to what kind of laws and customs ruin is 
due when it comes ; and again, what changes in these laws and 
customs would be salutary to the state — if we can do this, 
my Megillus and Cleinias, it is worth while to (take the argu- 
ment's offer and) treat the same subject pretty much all over 
again — unless (of course) we have some fault to find with what 
has gone before." 

359 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(Bruns pp. 163 ff. holds, naturally, that all in this passage that 
points back to anything in Bks, I. or 11. is a forgery of the editor ; 
consequently whatever he cannot interpret as a reference to a 
previous part of Bk. III. he rejects.) 

C 2. ov yeLpov<i ov8' kXarrovij " as good, aye, and as long." 

c 4. (TX^^ov (a favourite form of qualification in the Laws), " if 
I am not mistaken " (it is Midsummer Day). 

C 8. yevijjfxeda rals Stavocats : a bold phrase ; " let us put 
ourselves in thought." Stallb. cps. Menex. 239 d ev l/ceivw 
Tw )(|0ovcp yevofievov Xoyco. 

C 9. By TO. fxera tovtmv he probably means the territories of 
these three states, including the towns dependent on each. 

d 1. tKttvtos : its position suggests that this word rather 
qualifies than strengthens vTroxeipia ; i.e. that it means not 
thoroughly^ but virtually. 

d 2. ws ye Xkyerai to tov jjlvOov : " significat ipse Plato, se in 
his enarrandis incertos sequi fontes. Quod profecto dignum est 
animadversione, quandoquidem in iis, quae deinceps exponit, 
aliquoties discessit ab iis quae ab Herodoto, Xenophonte, aliisque 
scriptoribus de iis rebus memoriae prodita sunt," Stallb. We cannot 
help suspecting that Plato is here continuing to some extent 
the invention of history in which he has been recently engaged. 

d 10. 7rdvT€<s ol TOT€ I all the inhabitants of those three states 
— the kings included. — tovtols and avrwv refer to the kings. 
The oaths are repeated below in detail, when the position of the 
Srjuoi is defined. 

e 1-3. StacfiOdprj . . . KaraXveraL : in both these remarks the 
Ath. seems to be contemplating the overthrow of a form of govern- 
ment by a force within the state, not, as at 709 a 3, the conquest 
by another state, and consequent subjection of the inhabitants, or 
even such interference of one state with the constitution of 
another as was common at the time of the Peloponnesian War. — 
For the omission to repeat the preposition viro before o-t^wv avrcoi/ 
cp. 635 e and 685 b. 

e 5. vvvSr) jxev : " here," says Bruns, " is conclusive proof that 
the part of the treatise which preceded Bk. III. was not, — or, at 
least, not merely — Bks. I. and II." If we follow Bruns we get 
into trouble with his " Redaktor." What editor who could insert 
so many forged references, would fail to expunge one which 
evidently stultified his arrangement ? — Badham and Cobet are 
clear that oXtyov 'ifxTrpoa-Oev is a wrongly inserted marginal 
explanation of vvvSrj. If so, it must have been a very early 

360 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

insertion, for Photius quotes this passage as it stands (s.vv. vvv 8yj, 
though he omits the yuev, and says it is from Bk. IV. ; the next 
quotation he gives — Eur, Hipp. 233 — has, like our present passage, 
vvvSi] (xkv followed, after an interval, by vvv Se). Besides, both 
phrases have their own work to do in the sentence. vvvSrj fxev is 
contrasted with vvv S' in e 6, while oA. e/xir. specifies the time 
of the action of TrcpLT^'Xovre'i : "a little time back, when we 
happened, the other day, on this subject in our conversation." It 
seems to me that it is the least extravagant of all the assumptions 
necessitated by this passage, to suppose it to refer to a jjrevious 
discussion — either an imaginary discussion, or one recorded in a 
lost dialogue.^ There is nothing at the beginning of Bk. I. to 
suggest that this is the first meeting of the three interlocutors. 
The sentiment is entirely in harmony with Plato's views as 
expressed in the Laws and elsewhere as to the perfect self- 
sufficiency of aperr)^ whether of men or of political organizations. 
Besides, it is a well-known Platonic doctrine that "nothing that 
is can be destroyed, except by its own proper and specific evil " 
(A, E. Taylor, Plato, p. 87). Cp. Rep. 609 a 9 to (rvfxcjiVTov 
apa KaKov eKacrrov Kal 7y Trovrjpia eKacTTOv (XTroXXva-iV, r) et prj rovro 
(XTroXei, ovK av aAAo ye avro en ^La^Oeipeuv. But nowhere 
in the Laws is there {pace Bitter) anything to justify the very 
specific reference in the text — nowhere such a statement as e.g. we 
find at Arist. Pol. 1312 b 38 PacriXda 8' wo pXv rwv e^w^ev 
TjKurra (fyOeipeTaL, 8io Kal 7roXv)(p6vL6<s ecrrtv * e^ avrrj^ 5' at 
TrXiiCTTaL (fiOopal crvfxISaLvovcrLv. Whereas, however, Aristotle in 
this passage merely says " revolution comes, as a rule, from within 
the state,^' what Plato means, I take it, is thiat " revolution is the 
government's or king's own fault ; " i.e. I take o-^wv avrwv to refer, 
not to the people of the state concerned but, to its government. 

e 9. epyoLS yevoixevoa : i.e. the ascertained subsequent history 
of the three kingdoms, contrasted with which not only the 
description of the first three polities, but even the traditional and 
varying accounts of the first Dorian establishment are k€v6v tl. 
(Some interpreters have thought that Kevov tl refers to pure 
theory, apart from facts.) 

e 10. Xoyov : almost doctrine, view. 

684 a 1. Badham is doubtless right in excluding from the text 
the second tov avrov Xoyov. It disturbs the construction, and 
looks like a mere accidental repetition. — dXriOetav, "reality." 

' F.H.D. thinks the reference is to the disastrous result of rd i)TTda6ai 
airrov v<p' iavTov at 626 e 3. 

361 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

a 3. rpiTTals : not merely a variety for TpLcrt ; each time the 
oath was taken three kings or three communities were addressed. 

a 4. The gen. of the inf. indicates the purpose of the common 
laws of the three states, and goes closely with 'Wcvro : they were 
the laws, i.e., which regulated the mutual relation of kings and 
subjects — the ol jxkv and the ot Se respectively of the oath. 

a 6. For e/ATreSoo) in the sense of keep an oath cp. Eur. I.T. 790 
rov 8' opKOv ov Karijj/xoa-' c/xTrcSwcro/zev. 

1) 2. An ungrammatical corrector of A altered SrjjjiOL to SrjfjLov. 

b 5. TO ye fJi€yi(rTov . . . virrfp^ev . . . iroiov ; to /SotjOovs ye 
€Lvai ktX. This use of ro ye is the same as in the parallel 
expression at Euthyd. 291 a, where the best MSS. have to ye ev olSa 
OTL ovT€ l^vdvSrjfxos rjv ktA. There Bernhardy altered to to roSe 
(as Badham does here), A MS. variant of to Se (not to Se ye) for 
to ye gave some confirmation to Bernhardy 's conjecture, and 
Burnet adopts it in the text. But he does not even mention 
Badham's correction of this passage. I think the text ought to 
stand at both places. — to does not go closely with /xeyLo-rov as an 
attribute : it is an independent demonstrative ; cp. 807 a 6 
ovKovv to ye SiKauov (fiafxev, — "was not that point of the greatest 
importance to the political arrangements ? " (Lit. " to the 
establishments of polities, as by law established, in the three 
states.") 

b 7. etVe ktA. : this clause seems added by way of implication 
that the agreement was not more in the kings' interest than in 
that of the peoples. 

b9f. Here we have the principle of our " League of Nations" 
proposals. 

C 1. The following little apology for the use of a certain 
amount of force was thought so inapposite by Zeller and Stallb. 
that they reject from kol /x-qv to tl /xt^v; at c 10, and Schanz 
follows them. The connexion of ideas from c 1 to e 5 may be thus 
expressed : although the Dorian body politic could not dispense 
altogether with the surgeon's knife, it had at all events this 
advantage, that it was free from the diseases of millionaires and 
of debt ; it is true that it was necessary to encounter the popular 
prejudice against the use of force, but its rulers and guides were 
not hampered by the conservative cry ^^ /xyj Ktvelv ra aKivrjTa" 
(i.e. " vested interests "). 

C 3. For Kaddirep av el cp. below 872 c 4. 

c 7. TO ^e y' : cp. Apol. 23 a 5, Rep. 340 d 7 (" whereas, in point 
of fact," Adam), Laws 691 d 6, 731 e 3. "For all that (one must 

362 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

often be satisfied, etc.)." — For ia-rlv dyaTrr^TOV . . . ct kul tls 
. . . SvvatTO cp. Thuc. ii. 39 el kOkXoi^ev Kiv^vveveLv^ irepiyiyvcTai 
rjfXLv . . . fjL7] 7rpoKdfjLV€LV, where Dion. Hal. Uepl Oovk. tSiw/xaros 
xii. 1 finds fault with Thucydides' grammar: "eVrau^a ycip rh 
fi€V kdkXoLp.ev pyjfxa tov pkXXovTos kcm xpovov SrjXoyTtKov, to 8e 
ireptyLyveraL tov irapovros," and editors emend to kdkXofJueVj and 
cp. Mep. 435 d, where it is made clear that dyairrjTov (kcTTLv) can 
be TOV /xeAAovTos xpovov SrjXioTiKOVf by the substitution of it for 
tKavcjs dv kxotj and k^apKka-ei. So that here we must take ecrriv 
a. TT. to mean " we may often have to be satisfied." (Cp. Goodwin, 
M. and T. 500.) 

d5. avTois : Ast calls this "redundant." Now in the passages 
he — on 625 a 3 (cp. Heindorf on Gorg. 482 d 1) — cites for the 
redundant avTos, the noun or pronoun thus resumed in the avTo^ 
has been partially lost sight of, owing either to a turn in the con- 
struction, or the length of the intervening part of the sentence ; 
whereas here there is no such reason for the renaming of the person 
spoken of. Wagner proposes ao-rois for a^jTois ; Schneider, read- 
ing avToi<s, takes it to refer to the citizens. This last is the best 
way out of the difl&culty. — yJTrep . . . yiyveTaij " and that is just 
the reproach which is made." 

d 6. A, L and have dW-qXats voixoOeTOVfxkvai<s. All the edd. 
follow the marginal reading of Cod. Voss., and two inferior MSS., 
in reading aXAat? vojjl. I conjecture the original reading to have 
been dXXy voixodeTovfxkvais, and that an early corrector wrote 
-Aats over -Xrj, with the result that this was subsequently read as 
aAA>yAat§. — " In many cities whose laws were formed under other 
circumstances " gives a more apposite sense here than " quae multis 
aliis in civitatibus, cum leges accipiunt, usu venit " (Schneider). 

d 7. It is better to take StdXva-tv as governed by ^>yT>y, than 
(supposing a zeugma) by Kivecv. — opiov w?, "from a perception that." 

d 8. dv€v TovT(j)v, "failing such measures," "on any other 
terms." — w?, " because." 

e 1. For the proverbial pirj klv€lv to. dKtvrjTa cp. Schol. on 
Theaet. 181a. 

e 2. The MSS, have etcrryyov/xevov. I have adopted H. Kichards's 
suggestion that we ought to read ela-qyovukvw. There is no 
other instance, I believe, of kirapda-daL with the ace. of the person 
denounced, and the analogy of similar compounds is against it. 
Burnet suggests (privately) that probably we ought to read 
€i(rTqyovp.kv(i)v. 

e 3. irdvT dv8paj " any lawgiver " (however able). At Prot. 

363 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

323 a Trdvra avSpa means "any man" (however unskilled), — /cat 
TovO' . . . vTTTJpxev, " had this advantage as well " (as that spoken 
of above at b 5 ff.). 

e 4. ovTiDS, " as it was." — KaXws kol dvcfxea-i^Tios, " whereby 
they escaped all painful animosities." — The re and Kai mark that 
the advantage consisted in two facts : (1) there could, from the 
nature of the case, be no disputes about anybody's share of land, 
and. (2) no one had to be relieved of debt : Siave/xecrdaL is pass. — 
The change in construction is a marked instance of the tendency 
to vary the form of expression. 

e 8. " KaroLKicris scr. rec. : KaroLKrja-LS A L 0," Burnet. 

685 3- 1. avTwv probably refers to the avrots of the previous 
question : " what point in their conduct ? " Megillus does not like 
hearing " Dorian institutions " and " failure " connected. (Another 
alternative is to suppose avriov to refer to the KaroiKicrts and 
vojjLodecrLa : the answer to the question rather makes for the former 
interpretation.) 

a 2. As Stallb. says, olkyjo-l^ is the right w^ord here. Cp. 681 a 7. 

a 6 ff. ttAAa firjv . . . TTopeveorOaL, " easy or not, we have got to 
consider and investigate this point now or else relinquish our old 
men's sober pastime of law -hunting, with which we promised 
ourselves on starting to sweeten the toil of our journey." — The 
explanation of the Cretan at the end of this book changes the 
TratSta into (nrovSrj. — aAvTTws recalls the ovk drjScos of 625 a 6 and 
the jjieTd pacTTMvrjs of b7. — Ritter cps. Phaedr. 276 d where 
Socrates speaks of writing a hook as being the preparation of a 
pastime for old age ; cp. also Farm. 137 b 2, and below 712 b 2. 

a 8. (Tiocppova : H. Steph., followed by Ast, inserted a Kal before 
this word ; Wagner would reject it as a marginal interpretation of 
TrpecrjSvTLK'jv ; Schanz reads o-w^/aovws. No change is needed. 
Stallb. aptly cps. 769 a 17 Trpea-f^vTOiv €fji(j)p(ji)v TratSia ; cp. also Tim. 
59 d ixkrpiov dv kv tw /^lO) TratStav kol cf)p6vi/xov ttololto, where 
Plato is speaking of philosophic theorizing. — Burnet has cleared 
up a good deal of the difficulty of the passage by putting the 
comma after e^erd^ovras instead of after vo/xwv. — The participles 
a-KOTT. KOL €^., which both govern tovto, though grammatically 
subordinate to SieXdetv, really contain the main idea of the 
sentence. It reads as if, when he began it, he meant it to be 
merely Set . . . rjfxds tovto ctk. kol l^., tt. v. Trat^etv TratS. rrp. 
aiocfi., but changed it, as the further thought occurred, to irallpvTas 
^LiXOeiv ktX. 

b 4. For the omission of Trept before tovtojv cp. 635 a 7. — With 

364 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

TtttVas supply TToAeis (rather than olKrj(r€Ls), and so with trc/oas 
two lines below. — o? . . . SLaKeKoa-fx-qKacnv : the tense of the verb 
helps the quasi-pei*sonification of vofioi, and is decidedly against 
taking tovt(ov as referring to persons ; and the word might have 
been so taken without changing vo/xiov to voixoOctmu, as Badham 
does (and tiv' to riviov), simply by supposing yj tovtojv to stand for 
rj TTcpl Tiov vofidiv rovroiv {jdv dv6p(x>Tro)v). 

b 5. €v8oKLfjMT€po}v and fieL^6v(j)v both qualify TroXecDv, and irept 
(so Ast for the MS. Trept) governs KaroiKicreiov (on which ttoAcwi/ 
depends). — For the plur. KaTOiKtcreiov cp. rat? Karaa-rdo-ea-Lv tmv 
TToAfcTetwi/ at 684 b 5. — Steph. first corrected the MS. KaroiK-qcreoiv 
to KaTOLKLo-eiov. Ast and Stallb. take Kar. ttoX. closely together, 
Ast translating the two words by " Staatsverfassungen." A com- 
parison of Re}J. 497 b, /XT^Se/xiai/ a^tav etVat tcov vvv KardcTTaatv 
TToAeo)? (f)LX.o(r6cf>ov (fivcrew^, might seem to suggest that KaTOLKta-eoiv 
TToXeuiv here are treated as a single noun, and that the adjj. agree 
with them both, not with TroAewv alone ; Adam in 'his note cps. 
Prot. 319 d and Pol. 296 e {6pdrj<s TroAew? SioiKrycrews). 

b 6. As Ast says, avri here means in preference to, as at Phaedr. 
232 a (with alpeLcrdat) ; cp. also Tim. 26 e 1 t^ tlv' €t' dWov avrl 
TovTov ^rjT7]T€ov, and Gorg. 526 e ov eyo) (firj/jLu dvTt irdvTiav twv 
evOdSe dyo)V(av eivat. 

b 7-e 4. At 684 a attention was called to the measures adopted 
by the Dorian states to secure internal stability ; here we are con- 
cerned with their defence against a possible attack from without. 

b 7. There is no 8e corresponding to this /xev, only the resuming 
8yj in Trpos Brj ravr in d 2. 

C 2 f . ot irepl TO 'lAfcOv oIkovvtcs, and rry . . . Swd/xei rrj Trepl 
Ntvor yevopikvrj : we saw on 676 c 6 that Trept c. gen., when 
joined to such words as airia, firj^avq, H'^VH-V — i-^- such words as 
naturally take a dependent gen. — often stands in the place of a 
simple gen. Plato moreover often uses irepc c. ace. as a substitute 
for the simple gen. after other kinds of noun. In other words 
Trept c. gen. represents our objective, Trept c. ace. (generally) a 
possessive gen. In the two phrases given above we have a 
transitional stage, in which a participle is added to the nept : rrj 
TTcpL Niv/ov yevofXiVY) is hardly to be distinguished in sense from rrj 
Tov Nii/ou Cp. below 690 d 6 ot Trepi re "Apyos Kal Mea-crrjvrjv 
jSacrtAets. A similar periphrastic use of Kara may be observed in 
KttTtt yrjpa<i and Kara y€vo<5 at 692 a 1, which stand for subjective 
genitives. 

C 4. Opa(Tvv6pi€voi Toi/ Trokifiov 7]y€Lpav tov iirl Tpotav, " by 

365 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

their insolent behaviour provoked the (Greek) expedition against 
Troy." 

C 5. a-\rj^a here used in the sense of dignity, glory ; a poetical 
use, which is only general in late prose authors. 

C 6. TO crw{'d/x€i/ov, "while it lasted," lit. "which still lasted." 
— KaOaTrep vvv . . . Kal rore : " ad illustrandam sententiam 
superiorem quae afferuntur per comparationem, ea ao-vj/Serws 
accedere solere non uno loco ostendimus : v. ad Gorg. 448 e, Kep. 
497b, 577 c, Crat. 433a, Theaet. I73d, Phaedon. 61a, Legg. 628 d, 
659 e" [as Stallb. stops the passage], "Pol. 296 e," Stallb. — who 
compares the " apposition " of the explanatory comparing clause to 
the apposition of single nouns. It is like the direct answer to a 
question, which needs no connecting link (cp. e.g. 685 a 2). 

C 7. €K€Lvr]v rrjv crvcrTaOeiarav crvvra^tv, " the united Assyrian 
Empire," Jowett. The selection of an expression, which would 
apply to the Dorian federation as well, suggests an equality of 
power on both sides. 

C 8 f . /Jteya . . . cyeyovei, " for the fact that Troy had again 
been captured was a strong ground of complaint against the 
Greeks." The story of the lirst capture is told at II. v, 640 ff. 
The analogy of kyKXqixara Trpos dX.XyjXovs at Eep. 464 d, and 
Lav)s 737 b shows that irpos c. ace. denotes not the people appealed 
to (here the Assyrians), but those appealed against. Even lyKaXelv 
can have tt/oos c. ace. instead of the ordinary dat. ; cp. Demod. 
384 e TOiavTa eyKaXovcTLv 7rpo<s dXXijXov<s. 

d 1. T^9 ^PXV'^ • • • fxopiov : " hoc unde Plato hauserit, 
incertum," Stallb. 

d 2. Trpos 8r] ravra Travra, " propter haec omnia," Ast ; better 
^' to meet all these perils," " in the face of all this." — " ravr' tjv 
Schneider [and Hermann] ; ravxT^v A L ; ravra vulg." Burnet, 
If it were not for the Travra and the ws after naXcos in d 5, it 
would be simpler (omitting Travra and w?) to adopt the MS. 
ravrrjv. The ws may plausibly be ousted, as Steph. suggested, 
and as Ficinus seems to have read ; and though Travra might 
conceivably be a mistake for a raijra which had been written 
in the margin as a variant for .rai;r>;v, such a variant was not 
likely to be suggested unless the Travra had been already in the 
text. As the Travra is there, and as Ast is no doubt right in 
denying that it can be construed with dvrjvprjfievrj Kal kut. as 
omni ex parte, Schneider and Hermann's emendation must be 
regarded as certain. 

d 4. The /xta and the aSeA^wv bring into prominence the 

366 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

cohesion that ought to have continued among the forces of the 
Dorians. 

d 6. The Sta^epovrws was probably not felt to be, like KaAws, 
a qualification of dvr)vpr]fjL€vy] and KaTaKiKocrfirffjievrj, but, like the 
fi€TpL(D<; in ov ttolvv fxeTpicDS ytyverat at Rep. 504 c, to have, with 
the r]v, the force of an adjective: "and the force had the 
advantage over that which went against Troy." — The point of 
the sentence is that the defensive arrangements were admirably 
devised, and calculated to impose on an opponent. 

d 7. The rjyovvTo (" people thought ") resumes the w? eSoKei. 

d 8. dp)(^6vT0}v dp)(^ovTas : as we might say " general for 
general, the French had the advantage," only in Greek the quasi- 
absolute expression fits more compactly into the syntax. 

e 2. Stallb. takes tovtovs to be to ctti Tpotav d(f>LK6fJi€Vov 
(TTparoTreSov ; but this means that the same people are referred 
to as €K€LvovSj in the same breath. Ritter is no doubt right in 
holding (on 682 de) that both vevLKrjKevaL and rjTTrjcrdai refer to 
the same victory, and that tovtovs and tovtcov are the Dorians, 
and €K€ivovs the Achaeans. There is no need to suppose that 
either side was identical with the Trojan veterans ; the eKTreo-ovre? 
of 682 e 2 may have included both veot and survivors of the 
Trojan expedition. It was the name of the Achaeans only that 
was identified with the Trojan expedition. Under the new name 
of Dorians and with Heraclid leaders the returned exiles showed 
by their victory that they were better men than those who had 
retained the old name. — As in the case of Epimenides at 642 d, 
Plato treats history very carelessly. It is only at this second 
reference to the events that the Heracleidae are mentioned at all. 
He must have known the common account, which represented the 
Dorians as foreigners who came under the Heraclid (i.e. Achaean) 
leadership, eighty years after the Trojan war, to settle in the 
Peloponnese. His view seems to be, that about these prehistoric 
times, one story was as good as another. (Cp. Thuc. i. 12, where 
the author gets into difficulties in trying to reconcile tradition 
with the Iliad.) — i^TTao-^at ; the MS. reading, if correct, must 
stand as a historic present. Boeckh was probably right, however, 
in emending it to rfrr-qcrOai. 

e 3. Ttvt Siavota TavTTf is the original MS. reading (so Burnet ; 
Schanz gives tlvl 8. ToiavTrf)^ but it was early altered, either to 
rri 8. Tavrrf^ or tlvl S. TOLavrr). ovtos tis is used as a variety 
for TOLovTos Tis ; cp. o^tos for tolovtos at Pind. 0. iv. 38 ovros 
iyu) Ttt^vTart, and below Tavra for roiavra at 706 c 7. 

367 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

e 6. The order of the words in this sentence is peculiar. (For 
the TO which goes with otea-Oai cp. Rep. 498 d 6 to /xevTot fjurj 
TretdecrOaL tois Aeyo/xevois rovs ttoAA-ovs Oavfia ovBev.) " Is it 
not also likely that they should think that the arrangement 
would be a stable one, and would be likely to last ? " (Badham's 
alteration of the first kol to Sta does not give the right sense.) 

686 a 1. avTov'i : i.e. the ol rore of 685 b 7 (and e 4), the 
Dorians of the time. — ravd' : the Dorian federation or empire. 

a 3. A has StaKCKoa-fiTjcrOai and this is given as a variant in O, 
though and L read StaKeKoa-fxrjfxevovs. A break in the construc- 
tion, which goes on as if an "and they reflected " had been inter- 
posed before this and the following inf. K€\p7]fxkvovs etvat, is a 
quite natural method of varying a chain of participles. Those 
who read ScaKeKoa-fjiy^fxevovs have to do something with the eivat 
in a 4. Badham, followed by Schanz, strikes it out ; Apelt, p. 5, 
would read olfiat for it, Madvig dei — The three things that made 
it reasonable to expect that the Dorian federation would be firm 
and lasting w^ere : (1) the memory of common exploits, (2) the 
kinship of their rulers, and (3) the fact that they were assured, 
by the oracles that they had consulted, of the blessing of Heaven. 
And yet, as we learn from the following paragraphs, these glorious 
prospects soon vanished. Sparta alone maintained the Dorian 
tradition, and that was weakened by constant conflict with the 
two other members of the Confederacy. 

b2. ftexpt TO, vvv : the rd is supported by all MSS., and by 
a marginal note in stating that it existed " in all copies." 
Steph. corrected it to tov, and Schanz followed him. — cTret, " and 
yet,'' " though " ; cp. above on 669 b 6, and 875 c 3. 

b 3. yevo/xevfj ye rj totc Stavota, " if the plan had been carried 
out." — Koi (rvix(f>(i)vy)(Ta(ra els eV, " and if the confederacy had been 
unanimous." There is a slight zeugma here ; the plan was that 
of a confederacy, and the carrying out of the plan involves the 
existence of the confederacy, and it is with this that, in sense, 
(TVfx(f)ii)V'q(ra<Ta agrees. 

b 8. There is much to be said for Ast's (and Badham's) aAAoo-c 
for the MS. aA.Ao ; "by looking elsewhere" fits in much better 
with the rest of the sentence than " by looking at anything else," 
or " at any other o-va-Trnxa " ; and the omission of the o-e is a 
likely mistake. — The aAXas, and the d/xeX-qcreLe tovtiov are both 
redundant. — Is it not possible that the words aAAo<o-€> (tkottCjv 
were not written by Plato, but by a commentator ? 

c 1. o-wfovo-as : the Ath. (speaking from the general Hellenic 

368 



NOTES TO BOOK III 686 C 

point of view) thinks of what Hellas had lost in being disappointed 
of a powerful champion ; the Spartan, on the other hand, thinks 
more of the KaAo, koX fxeydXa Trpdyfiara — the great tradition, that 
his own state had kept alive ; and so he puts this consideration 
first. 

c 4. TovTo : adverbial, "in this case, here." Cp. 677dl, 
ravTa at 700 d 1, and Kal tovto at Apol. 29 b (where Burnet how- 
ever follows Eusebius in reading Kairoi against the MSS. and 
Stobaeus). 

C 7 ff. a.p ovv . . . Stavor^OiocrLV, "my good sir, can it be that 
we have fallen unawares into a common mistake ? Everybody, 
when he contemplates some event or production that has excited 
his admiration, thinks ' what a good thing ! it might have pro- 
duced marvellous results, if people had only known how to take a 
proper advantage of it ! ' Is it not possible that, on this occasion, 
we may form wrong and untrue ideas about this very subject ? — 
just as any men may on any other subject, about which they 
should think as I have above described ? " — Instead of directly 
continuing this " satisfactory " investigation into the mistakes in 
the Dorian laws and constitution, the Ath. here interposes a 
caution — which he dramatically confesses (at d 7 f.) that he needs 
himself — against being dazzled by mere power or force — as if it 
were the great object, with the state or man, to he strong enough 
to do as he likes in the world. It is not enough to be strong 
enough to defy the Persians ; you must be wise as well. Even 
if the Dorians had known how to maintain their empire, it might 
not have been for their own or their neighbours' good. This 
protest is, as he says, quite on the same lines as the deprecation 
of the cultivation of mere bravery in Bk. I. — The construction, 
as in a 3, is broken in the middle ; the Se in d 1 corresponds to 
the /xev after oto^cvot, but it introduces, not a participle, as we 
should expect, but a finite verb. 

d 1. Cobet would reject KaAw? and rtva, but this impoverishes 
the clause : Kara, nva rpoirov implies " in a way which the 
(imagined) speaker could specify " ; the dpa in c 9 " imagines " the 
speaker. — to is best taken with vvv, and not adverbially with 5e, 
as Stallb. 

d 3. ovre Kara <f>vcriv, " and against the natural course of 
things," " contrary to the law of the universe." Cp. 682 a 2, 
642 a 3 7^ Kara (f>vcn.v avrov Siop^(uo"is. 

d 5. Naturally Megillus takes some time to see what the Ath. 
is driving at. 

VOL. I 369 2 B 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 7. For the tense of KareykXacra cp. €fj,v'q(rOr]v 688 a 3. 

d 8. oLTro/SXexj/as yap . . . eSo^e /xol : a typical conversational 
irregularity ; cp. 8 11 c 7. — o-roAos here, like o-rpaTOTreSov below 
at 687 a 5, seems used, not merely of the Dorian army but, of the 
Dorian nation, and the terms are chosen because the nation had a 
military organization ; cp. 666 e 1 a-TpaToireSov yap TToXiruav e^eTe. 

d 9. I strongly suspect that we ought to insert av somewhere ; 
probably after Oavfjiacrrov. If we do not, we must supply, in 
sense, after"EAArya-iv : " or ivould have been." 

e 2. Megillus is still quite in the dark. " What," he says, 
" wasn't there sense in all we have been saying ? " " Maybe," 
answers the Ath. 

e 5. 'irrade : a gnomic aorist in a dependent sentence is a rarity. — 
€7raOe rovro, ots : the brachylogy is less remarkable in English 
if we translate 'iiraOe " feels." It is, at any rate, far less irregular 
than the passage in Phaedo 75 b — eKetcre dvoLo-etv, ort 7rpoOvfX€LTai 
ktX. — with which Stallb., after Heindorf, compares it. 

e 8. The word evSaifxovot (cp. the use of evSatfxwv above at 
662 d 4) first gives the key to the ground of the Ath.'s objection. 
He has called a halt, because they were in danger of thinking 
that the lost opportunity necessarily meant the loss of national 
"happiness." There were other ways of missing that, besides not 
being strong enough. 

687 a 1- Still Megillus does not see. "What is the harm of 
that ? " he says. 

a 2 ff. The question now started is : " what are the limits to 
the advantages to be derived from mere power and force ? " — Trot 
fSXkiruiv . . . 6p6C)s Xeyei : i.e. " by what prospects is the praise 
justified ? " This question is not directly answered. Indirectly 
Megillus (at e 5 ff.) is brought to see the answer. 

a 4. Kara rpoirov : cp. 635 d 7. 

a 4 f . 7ra)5 . . . rov Kacpov ttws av €tv\ov ; " how, exactly, 
would they have made the best they could out of the situation." 
Winckelmann's ttws av ervxov goes very well by itself, but not 
after the preceding ttojs ; nor does Hermann establish the second 
TTws by reading the first as an enclitic, and taking it with 
Aeyo/xevov : the subject has not been encountered by chance. (He 
translates : " de ipso cujus nescio quomodo nunc mentio incidit.") 
On the other hand the enclitic {pace Badham) is very much in 
place where it stands. It gives just the general significance to 
rov Kacpov av €tv)(^ov which shows us that we are not to apply 
these words merely to the utilizing of the opportunity spoken of 

370 



NOTES TO BOOK III 687 a 

above at c 9 and e 6. It gives the preceding interrogative the 
meaning " to what extent ? " or /' in what respect ? " Jowett and 
others take the question to mean merely " what would have been 
the way in which they would have gone to work in order to 
be successful ? " — But what follows is not " would it not be by 
taking such and such steps, and securing such and such results ? " 
but ^^ would not men praise them, supposing such (necessary) 
steps had been taken, and such results secured ? " — All this assumes 
the correctness of Ast's startingly enlightening emendation of 
fTTLdv/jLoUv in b 2 to €7ratvo?€i/. 

a 5. (TTpaTOTreSov : cp. above on cttoXov d 8. — tov Kaipov 
Tv\(uv occurs at Ale. 11. 148 a 6 in the sense of " to make the best 
use of an opportunity." 

a 6. The ap ovk is resumed and explained by the /xmv ov ktX. 
in b 2, which shows that the Ath. is asking whether the world 
in general, would not be satisfied with the result described. — 
(rvv€(TTr](Tav . . . a.(T(f)a\(2s avro, " had bound them firmly 
together." — The change to the impf. in Slcctoj^ov marks the endur- 
ing consequence, as compared with the initial act described in 
(rvv€(rTrj(rav. 

b 2. eTTiOvixoiev MSS., €7ratvoL€V Ast. Badham (reading kiriOv- 
jxouv) would reject the question altogether. But the very weakness 
of eirtOvfxoLev forbids us to suppose that anyone could have inserted 
a sentence including it. Even if it could mean : " are not those 
the things which would make them covet power ? " it is out of 
place ; but the previous eiridv/xoUv prevents us from thus supply- 
ing the missing object to eTriOvfioiev here. But with eiraLvoUv 
(for which the other word is, in the circumstances, a very likely 
error) the sentence aptly resumes the reference to tov eVatvoi/ 
TovTov in a 2. The question then means : " if such a result as I 
have described were achieved, you would think people's praise 
justified, wouldn't you ? " — With eiraLvoTev we must supply ol 
av9p(i)7roL as subj., as at 685 d 7 with rjyovvTO. 

b 4. The question : " what would it all amount to ? " which we 
expect, is not put yet. Instead, we have another picture of 
coveted worldly distinction. " It is the same," he says, " with 
every kind of coveted position : a man praises it because he thinks 
it gives the power to do as one likes — and, after all, what does that 
amount to by itself ? " 

b 5. TtjUtts yevov? : i.e. "distinction conferred by noble ancestry." 
(Wagner takes yev'ov? as an objective gen. : " honours paid to his 
race.") 

371 



687 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

b 6. ecTrev : another gnomic aorist. — Trpbs tovto fBXkiroiv eiTrcv, 
" the prospect which makes him say so is . . ." — ws . . . y^vrjcrojxeva 
. , . TTOLVTa : a clear instance of an ace. absolute — attracted perhaps 
into the case of tovto. 

C 1. Ast writes ecm. 

C 2. I quite agree with Stallbaum that the words ws avros 
(f>r)(riv 6 Xoyos would be better away ; they must be due to a 
commentator, who put them in, either as an explanation, or as 
a parallel passage. — ev rt = " definite." I would translate : " all 
men have in common, as a definite object of desire, that which 
the argument has just brought out." 

C 11. evxoLfxeOa dvayKatois A, ev_)(o/xe^a avayKatios L O, and 
this was long the vulgate ; the restoration of the lost av between 
the two words of A is due to a marginal note of Cod. Voss., and 
was first printed by Bekker. 

d 1. TOi<s ye (fiiXoLs : it is here ingeniously hinted that, 
though each of us may think it an admirable thing for ourselves 
to be able to do as we like, we may yet see clearly that it is not 
always good for our friends to have this power. For instance, 
fathers would not grant it to their sons, nor, e.g., would a son in 
Hippolytus's position grant it to his father. This suggestion 
completely opens Megillus's eyes, and he sees the Ath.'s drift ; he 
was beginning to see it at d 9. — rat^ra : "acute demonstravit 
Boeckhius TavTa non esse in ravra commutandum," Stallb. 
*' TavTOL flagitat canon Cobetianus," Schanz ; but he reads Ta{;Ta. 

d 2. It is curious to note that A reads eavTOLo-Lv, but L and 
avTOis, though O mentions the former as a variant. 

d 4. Trats o)v dvSpi, " though one is a boy and the other a 
man." 

d 9. For the parenthetical Aeyei?, " you mean," or " you would 
say," cp. Grat. 421 c 7, and Philebus 49 a 9. 

d 10. It is impossible to give the force of these words in the 
absence of an English word which, like veavtas, means both young 
and hot-headed. The trt veos (wv) is, by implication, " because he 
is too young," so the yep^v wv is " because he is too old," and so 
Jowett's *' in the dotage of age, or the heat of youth " comes near 
to the Greek. — r) Kal, " or perhaps." 

e 1. fJirjSev Tcov KaXoiu Kal tiov StKatwv yLyvu)(rKiDV^ " quite 
blind to the right and justice of the case" ; and at e 3 6 Se irais 
yLyvuitTKYj is, " while the son is not blind." — As is usual with Plato's 
illustrations, there is a special appositeness in Theseus's case, for 
it was by a wish that the fatal result was produced. 

372 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

e 2. I think Tradi^jxacnv is used here, as at 681 d 8, and 695 e 3, 
in the sense of ^^circumstances," ^^ plight" though the analogy of 
812 c 3 €1/ TOLS TraO-q/xaaiv orav ^VXV y^yvQTai tells in favour 
of the meaning " emotions " : rot? yevofxevoL'g Qy^ael tt/oos . . . 
^IttttoAvtov is more naturally taken as " which befel Th, in 
relation to Hipp.," than " which overcame Th. in reference to 
Hipj)olytus." 

e 7. The utmost apparently that can be got out of the MS. 
reading rrjv fSovXi^crLV 8e fxrjSev fiaWov t. €. cf>. is " without 
praying that his desire should any the more be in accordance with 
his own reason." (Jowett's " for his wish may be at variance 
with his reason" cannot be got out of any of the readings.) As, 
however, A L O all give ttoXv as a variant for firjSev, and as in A 
there is a gap before /xqBev which may well have held ttoAv, we 
may perhaps (with Schanz and Burnet ) substitute ttoXv for fxrjSev, 
and thus obtain a more natural meaning. At the same time the 
question must be faced : how did fxyjSev come there if it was not 
what Plato wrote ? Also rovro Se looks like the main antithesis 
to ou TovTo in e 5 f., and perhaps with /m-qSev ^aAAov we might 
translate, " unless at the same time he prays that his desire should 
be in accordance with his own reason." 

e 8. The following words do more than repeat what has just 
been said if we read ttoAi; ; having said that it is far more 
desirable that the wish should harmonize with wisdom, he now 
adds that the one thing we ought to pray for — whether for men 
or for states — is that our wisdom may be great. — Seiv a-TrevSeiv (as 
active) corresponds precisely to iireiKTeov eorri (as passive). 

688 a 1. avSpa vofioderrjv : for the simple vofxoOiTrjv, like 
aOX-qrov dv8p6<s at Rep. 620 b 7. Ast unnecessarily inserted Kal 
before vo/x,, and Schanz, equally unnecessarily, rejected the word 
altogether. — It is best to take the (us clause not as dependent on 
a Aeyeiv supplied from the above Aeyetv 8ok€l<s but on the 
following kpLViqa-O-qv ; I would therefore put no comma at vo/xwi^, 
but would insert one after efxvi^crOrjv, to mark that kol v/xas 
iTravafXLfxvrjo'KU) has the ort clause (in a 4) as object : " I not only 
am reminded myself that a statesmanlike lawgiver ought always 
etc. . . . but I would further (eV-) remind you," etc. 

a 2. TOVTO : i.e. the need for, and the need for encouraging, 
vovs or (f>p6vri(rL<s. 

a 3. For the tense of lixvr^crdriv cp. KareykXacra 686 d 7. Neil 
on Ar. jE'gf. 696 says aorists of instantaneous action are almost 
confined to the dramatists. — Kar ap\a^ . . . Xexdevra is 

373 



688 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

parenthetical, and should be so marked — He uses the 1st pers. 
because it is a reminder to them all. 

a 4. TO fxkv cr^wv . . . TrapaKcXevfia : for the gen. taking the 
place of a possessive pron. cp. 63 1 a 2 crov Tr)v fiev eTTLxeip-qa-tv, 
and 822 d 8 i)fiC)v €/x7re7rTWK€r rots Adyotg. 

a 6. TO Se €fiov eXeyov : in a note on 643 a 3 Ast classes 
together cases in which, as there, the neuter possessive pron. has 
its verb in the 3rd pers. (e.g. 723 b, 778 e, Rep. 533 a, Lack 188 c, 
Ar. Eccl. 393) with those in which, as here, and at 860 c, and 
Theaet. 1 6 1 e, the verb is in the same person as that of the pronoun. 
He lays it down that in all these cases the neut. poss. is a peri- 
phrasis for the personal pronoun. I suggest that it is better to take 
the neut. poss. in the latter class of cases as adverbial — "as for me," 
" for my part." (Stallb. says that we ought to supply TrapaKeXevfia 
with TO 6/xdi/ — "while I uttered my injunction.") — tovto p.kv : 
possibly adverbial (cp. 686 c 4, 677 d 1, 700 c 8), possibly agreeing 
with TrapaKcXev/xa understood — which anyhow is the subject to 
KeXevoi. 

b 1 f . jJidXio-Ta Se Kol rrpos 7r/)WT/;v, "but most of all and 
first of all he should have in mind " etc. Stobaeus, apparently 
quoting from memory, omits Kat and writes Kai in the place of 
the T>y]/. 

b 2. crvfJLird(T7is rjyefxova dperrjs : cp. 631 c 6, 963a 8. 

b 3. So^a fxer epioros re Kat €7rt^i'/xt'a? tovtols €7rofxevr]s '• these 
words are best understood through a comparison of the contrasted 
state of mind described at 689 b 5 ff. oTroTav KaAot ev ^v)(rj XoyoL 
€v6vT€S fJLrjSev TTotwo-tv TrXeov. The right view m.ust be accom- 
panied by a passionate desire to see it acted on and enforced. 

b 4. The asyndeton is of the explanatory kind ; cp. on 685 c 6. 
" The fact is that." — It is instructive to note that there was a 
variant o eXeyov eyw, mentioned and condemned by 0, for 6 Aeywi/ 
cyw. — He means that he affirms as strongly as ever the need 

of VOV9. 

b 6. et 8' is Boeckh's incontestably right correction of the 
MS. eW\ For the sense cp. 636 c 1 Kat etVe Trat^ovTa etVe 
(TTTovSa^ovTa €vvo€tv Set TO- ToiavTa. In both cases be means that 
it is with him more than a mere " academic " opinion — such, e.g., 
as he would uphold in the course of their TracSid Trpea-fSevrtKr] 
cro)(^p(ov (685 a 7) ; he is strongly impressed with the necessity of 
carrying it out in practice. In other words, the notion is one 
which would stand the test of practical experience. We may well 
suppose that the Ath.'s earnestness here suggested to one of his 

374 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

hearers the advisability of getting his advice in the circumstances 
explained at the end of the book. — For Trai^etv and Trat^ia used 
of mere philosophical speculation cp. Parm. 137 bl -q f^ovXeaSe^ 
iTreiS/jTrep 8ok€l TrpayfiaTeiioSrj TratStav Trai^eiv, avr (fxavrov ap^oipai. 
(Ritter, pp. 17 and 19, who suggests by the way that perhaps we 
ought to discard the words ei 6' ws cr— ovSa^wv, and would doubt- 
less, with Ast, put only a comma after ytyvearOat, takes the whole 
to mean : " it may sound like a joke, but I mean it.") — otl 8-q 
<^r;/>tt, " I go so far as to say that " etc. What follows is an 
extreme statement of the Ath.'s belief — previously expressed — 
that (fipovrja-Ls is indispensable. We are not to conclude from the 
TOT€ that exactly this extreme statement was made before — though 
at 662 a 1 ff. he says something like it. — ^vxfj XPW^^'' '<t^' ♦ cp. 
Gorg. 466 e 9 aya^ov ovv otei, cav tls TroLrj ravra a av SoKrj avT<^ 
fSiXTicrra eivat vovv fxr] €)(a)V ; 

b 7. If we accept, as we ought, I think, the traditional inter- 
pretation of €.vxrj ;)(p7}o-^at as " to obtain one's request," we must, 
in order to explain the following aAAa, regard (T(f)aX.€p6v as a 
sort of contradiction of the idea of ev^rj xprjcrOaL — almost as if he 
had said : " to succeed in his prayer is a failure," i.e. " is 7iot to 
succeed, hvi, " etc. At 662 a 7 we have been told that to (f^v) 
aajSios Kol fir] (TVfi(f)€p6vT(jD<s avTio is a necessary consequence of 
wrongdoing. Perhaps some will, with Schanz, prefer to adopt 
Badham's dAA' r) for aAAot ; in which case the whole passage will 
mean, " that it is dangerous (for such a man) to pray, unless he 
prays that the opposite of what he wants may happen." Ritter 
well points out that the use of. ^ovXyjcrecn in this passage quite 
accords with the distinction drawn in the above-quoted passage in the 
Gorgias (466 e tf.), where Socrates distinguishes between a So/cet avrw, 
i.e. the means a man chooses to adopt, and a /SovXerai, the object 
he wishes to secure ; ignorance, he says, of the effect of the means 
may make the man miss his ultimate object; see especially 468 d. 
Now Badham's interpretation of our present passage ignores this 
distinction. 

C 1. I think it possible that cnrovSd^ovTa 5' . . . rtOere was 
originally a commentator's explanation of el 8' ws (nrov8d((x)v ; it 
serves that purpose admirably, and does not do much good where 
it stands. The following remarks merely emphasize the import- 
ance of vov<s and the dangers of dfxaOia. 

c 2. Tw Adyw : i.e. the historical investigation, interrupted at 
686 c 7, and soon to be renewed ; so that tw Aoyw ctt. does not 
mean, " if you attend to what was said then," but " if you attend 

375 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

to the argument as it proceeds," "if you let the Aoyo? guide you 
(in the future) " ; cp. d 4. 

C 3. If (ia(TiXkitiv is correct, cftOopas must be taken in a general 
sense, as downfall, not in the special sense of death. Very likely, 
though, Boeckh was right in altering fSacnXeoiv to jSacrtXeLiov ; 
cp. 684 a 2. 

C 4. 8 tav orj fxaros : called at 686 b 3 17 tot€ Stavota, "the 
(imperial) idea," or "scheme." 

C 5. TO, irepl Tov TroXe/xov : cp. on 685 c 2 ff., also below c 7. 

c 6. All modern editors adopt a late MS. (Ven. Marc. 184) 
reading TrpocrrJKev for the clumsy Trpoo-qKeiv of the best MSS. — rfj 
Xonrrj Se Trdorrj KaKca, "but by their manifold faults of another 
kind'" ; for Trda-r) cp. 637 a 3, 676 c 1. 

C 7. 8L€(f)0apfM€va agrees with tovs /JaortAets (or rots /^ao-tAeias) 
and TO Stavor^fxa understood. 

d 2. et TTov : for the ellipsis of the ytyi/€Tat cp. Rep. 497 e 2 
ov TO pLT] fSovXicrOat^ rjv 8' tyw, dX)C etTre/o, to p.rj Svvacrdac 
8LaK(x)Xeva-€L, and Arist. Nuh. 226 f. €7r€tT aTro rappov tov<s ^eoi>s 
v7r€p(fipov€iSj dXX' ovK (XTro Trjs yyjs, etTrep. There is no need, 
with Bekker, to read et irov ytyverai, ytyv€Ta6. Cp. the similar, 
but more remarkable, ellipsis of yevo/xei/as at Phaedr. 267 d 2 
aTroAvcracr^at 8iaf3oXd<s odev 8r] KpdTicrTos. 

d 5. (OS ovcTLV (ptXoi^, " for the friendship I bear you." 

d 6. kTraydkcnepoVj "would be distasteful to you" (and there- 
fore we won't do it). 

d 8. €V ots : quite general; "and that is where," i.e. in 
conduct rather than in words. — I have adopted Ast's eXcvOepios 
for the MS. kX€v6€po<ij not merely because the sentence runs better 
so, but because it gives us a better sense : " if you compare words 
with actions, you will soon see which praise is of the highest 
quality," comes in better here than : "the man of right feeling is 
never shown in his true character more clearly than by whether, 
in such circumstances, he praises or does not praise." Nor can we 
get a better sense by taking Kal fx-j with kXevdepo's. 

e 3. Stobaeus, in quoting this passage, has 8e before 8^, but the 
asyndeton is more impressive. 

e 5. TavTov TovTo 7r€<f)VK€vaL 7roL€LV, " must inevitably produce 
the same effect." — tov ye vop.o6eTr]v : Ast on 643 a 6, and Heindorf 
on Phaedr. 272 e have collected many instances of this "Attic," 
and,tas Heindorf says, peculiarly "Platonic" ace. with verbals 
in -rkov. 

e 7. dvoiav : another name for d/xaOta. Boeckh, on the 

376 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

grounds (1) that Ficinus translates the word here, and at 689 b 3, 
and 691 d 1, by ignorantiam, and (2) that Plato elsewhere couples 
ayi'ota with afxadia {Lysis 218 a, Soph. 229 c, Theaet. 176 c, Prot 
360 b, Ale. I. 118 a), concludes that ayi/otai/ was wliat Plato wrote 
here. But, of the passages quoted, those from the Sophist and the 
Theaetetus do not support the view that in his later writings 
Plato used ayvoia and dixadca as synonymous. In these two 
passages he denotes a special kind of ayi/ota by the name of 
d/Madta, distinctly adding, in the former passage, that there are 
other kinds of dyvota which could not be so called. Moreover, 
one of the arguments by which Ast supports Boeckh's view is that 
Plato opposes avota to vous, and dixaSia to <f>p6vrj(Tis. This does 
not sever avota from dfxadta here ; for, just above, vovs and 
cf)p6vr}(TLs have themselves been used as synonymous (688 b 2). 
Again, the definition of afxadia given in 689 a corresponds much 
better with the general meaning of avota than with that of 
ayvota, however likely may be restitution of the latter word in 
some passages; e.g. (?) Laws 819 d 2, Phil. 38 a, and 48 c, where 
Burnet prints it against MS. authority. — For the use of avota cp. 
Theaet. 176 e 5 vtto rjXtOtoTrjTos re Kal T7J<s ecrxdr-qs dvoias 
XavOdvovcrt t(^ ficv ofjiotovfievot 8ia ras dStKovs Trpd^cts, ra 8e 
dvofiotovfxevoi. 

689 a 5. The Tijv goes with the sentence orai/ . . . da-Trd^rjTat, 
which is felt to be in apposition to d/xaOtav and so to be the 
equivalent of a noun. — So^av : this may well have been (Schanz 
says was) the original reading of A ; but it was altered in that 
MS. to So^y, which is the reading of L and O and Stobaeus. 
Some late MSS,, however, recovered the correct reading. The 
absolute neut. part, is necessary to the sense of the sentence. 

a 7. The 6ta<^a)vta is not, of course, between pleasure and 
pain, but between these two sensations, and rational (or philo- 
sophical) opinion. It is the opposite of the a-vfx(j>(i)via spoken of 
at d5. 

a 9. fiiyKTTrjv 8e, on rov 7rkrjOov<i eart tyjs ^v)(rj^, " and it is 
of very wide extent, because it resides in the main division of the 
soul." 

b 1. 07r€/3 8yjfx6s T€ Kal TrXrjOo^ iroAeco? eaTt, " corresponds to 
the commonSj or multitude in a city." 

b 2. orav . . . rj \pvxq : when, that is, in the soul, viewed as 
a sort of community, power gets into the hands of the multitude, 
instead of into those of the men who are fit to rule. 

b 4. In form the re after TrdAews connects Oetyv dv with 

377 



689 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Trpoa-ayopevoi ; in reality the second statement is not so miicli an 
addition to, as an amplification of, the first. 

b 5. ravTov : this is used adverbially, in the sense of oxravTios — 
" equally in the case of a city and in the case of a single man." 
(0 omits the Kal before 8y], which shows that the writer did not 
understand ravrov ; kol is added in the margin of 0, and is found 
in A and Eus. and Stob. — Badham would reject t) xpvxr^ in b 3.) 

b 7. ravras, if singular, would probably have been neuter ; 
op. above tovto avoiav Trpoaayopevoo. 

C 1. aXA' ov Ttts Twv SrjpLLovpywv : i.e. " I should not call the 
d/xaOta of a hand-worker the worst kind of dfiaOia" In other 
words, it is a far worse evil for an unwise man to have his way as 
against the rulers of the state, than for a cobbler to mend 
shoes badly. Cp. what is said below at d 3 about the relative 
unimportance of the inability to read or swim. 

C 6. TOVTO . . . X€y6p,€vov, " this much then we are clear 
about, and will constantly affirm." The perf. part, expresses the 
making up of the mind once for all ; the pres. Xeyopievov the 
readiness to declare the opinion whenever it should be necessary. 
(Badham would read AeAey/xevov, Schanz brackets kol Xeyofxevov 
because Theodoret omits it, and Eusebius puts it after exo/x€vov.) 

C 7. A L and and all other MSS. of Plato have ravra 
fxavOdvovcTi. Eusebius, in his quotation of the passage, preserved 
nearly the right reading — he has raura dpLaOalvovcn — which is 
found first in a late hand in the margin of A and some other MSS. 
Stobaeus quotes it as eis ravra dfiavOdvova-i (see below d 9) — 
eU also Boeckh, as a conjecture. — For the ace. of the inner object 
TttuTtt ("in these respects") cp. Soi^h. 228 b 3 kv x/yvxy So^as 
iirLdvptaL<s KOi dv/xov rjSovais koI Xoyov XvTratg /cat Trai'Ta 
dWrjXoLS TavTa tcov (f>Xavp(i)S €)(^6vto)V ovk ycOijpeda Scacfiepoixeva; 
where ravra Scacfiepofxeva means " thus differing " [iravTa does not 
go with TavTo). Ast cps. 700 d ravr* ovv ovto) T€Tay/x€i/a)s yjOeXev 
dpxecrOat twv TroXiTOiv to ttXtJOos. 

C 8. I think it is better to put a comma after kx^H'^^^^i so that 
ttv Kal ktX. may refer specially to w? dpLaOkcnv oi/eiSto-reov. (So 
at d 2 ff. the commendation of wisdom goes with the absence of 
intellectual qualification.) 

c 9. Trdvv Xoyta-TLKoi : what we should call "senior wranglers." 

d 1. StaTreTrovrjixevoL (wcrt) is best taken as middle, governing 
both TrdvTu to, Kop^xpd and diravTa ocra 7rpo<g raxos rrj? xpvx'^s 
TrecfiVKOTa {€(ttl) — "and have perfected themselves in all the 
accomplishments and dexterities of which the mind is capable." 

378 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

(Theodoret, perhaps quoting from memory, has dyvoovcnv for 
dixaOecTLVj and the more matter-of-fact av^qv or av^rjcTLv for 
TaL\os. — This passage, so much quoted by the early fathers, 
doubtless reminded them of the 13th chap, of the 1st Ep. to the 
Corinthians.) 

d 2. Tor§ 6c TovvavTLOv e)(^ovTas tovtwv : i.e those in whom there 
was no 8La(f>u)VLa (a 7) between their likes and their judgement. For 
rovTtiiv (dependent on Tovvavrtov) which is probably neuter, and 
may be said to be the gen. of the ravra at c 7, Eusebius has 
TovTots, which might be either neut. or masc, and Theodoret has 
TovTov?. €XovTas is probably intransitive. 

d 3. Stallb. and Ziirr. wrongly write cTrto-rwi'Taf for eTricTTwyTat ; 
cp. 934 dl. 

d 4. 0)? €ix<f>po(rLVy " on account of their wisdom." Cp. above 
at 654 c 4 ff., the comparison between the education of the taste, 
and that of the mere executive powers in Music. 

d 5. dvev (Tv/x^covta? : it would come far short of Plato's 
meaning merely to explain that both state and man are hopelessly 
inefficient, if the executive is at variance with the legislative 
element. True wisdom, according to him, consists not in the 
doing what is right but in liking to do it. The choice of a musical 
term, denoting the harmony ordained by Nature between certain 
sounds, suggests that the same Nature is violated by discord in 
the soul, as is violated by discord in the physical world of sound. 
This way of considering the matter is well illustrated by Tim. 
47 d i) Se dpjxovia^ (ruyyevets €)(OV(Ta (f)opds tuls €V yj/xlv rrj^ 
4'^XV'* "^^pi-oSoLS, Tw fxerd vov Trpo(T\prip.kvio Movcrats, ovk kcj> 
TjSovrjv dkoyov, KaOdrrep vvv eivai 8ok€l ^prjcrtpLO^ aAA' €—6 ri^v 
yiyovvlav kv rj/xiv dvdppocrrov ^I'Xl'^ irepLoSoi' eis KaraKOcrprjaLV 
T€ KOL (TvpcfidiVLav kavTQ (Tvp.pxiyps v~o Movcwv SiSoTaL. Cp. 
also Rep. 591 d dkX del T-qv kv tw <rio/xaTL dpjxovLav tt]? €V ry 
4'^^XQ ^v€Ka orvp<f>wvia<i dpfMOTTOfM^vos (^avetrat, where, as at 430 e, 
and 443 d (an elaborate musical analogy), a-oxppoa-vvrj is spoken 
of as a crvpcfuovta j/'v^'/s ; also Phaedo 93 c ff., where the soul 
itself and virtue are both spoken of as a dp/xovta. The same 
analogy between the physical and moral world is claimed by 
Wordsworth when, in his Ode to Duty, he says : 

Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong : 

And the most ancient heavens through thee are fresh and strong. 

— Kol rh a-fiLKpoTarov elSos : as we should say, " not the ghost " 
or " the shadow of" 

379 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 6. We should not be far wrong in saying that here, as in the 
passages of the Republic cited above, the crvfjicfxovLa spoken of is 
what Plato elsewhere calls orui<f)po(rvvrj. He definitely explains 
that it consists of a state of mind, not in the character of a man's 
deeds, which might be rightly done from a wrong motive. 

d 8. o Se (XTrokenrofxevos : sc. ttJs cro^tas (not, as Jowett, rov 
Xoyov ; he translates " he who is devoid of reason "). — Trepl ttoXlv : 
a variety for ttoA-cws, which admits of being joined to aixadaivoiv 
in sense, as well as to aiory^p. 

d 9. Trav TovvavTLov, " far from it ! " The contrast between 
(T(3iT'i]p and dp.aOaLvoiu is not that of logical opposites, but of 
incongruities. — ei's ravra must mean the same as the rai^Ta at 
c 7 ; i.e. " in this respect." 

e 2. AeAey/xei/a redijTio ravTrj : AeAey/xeva here corresponds to 
and sums up the SeSoyp^evov Kal Aeyo/xevov above, as the reOy^Td) 
corresponds to the k€L(t6o). 

e 4. We now pass to a different subject ; i.e. the various " titles," 
as a lawyer would call them, by which rule is exercised. The Se 
(for which A first wrote re, and afterwards corrected it to Se, which 
is what Stobaeus has) marks the thought which serves to pass 
from one subject to the other : i.e. " men without o-o</)ia must not 
rule, but rulers we must have, all the same." 

600 a 1- a^tw/xara . . . rov re ap^eiv Kal ap\€crOai : a^tw/xa is 
used from the point of view of the ruler. It is his title, or claim 
to the position ; so that the addition of ap^eadai constitutes a 
zeugma. The claim is that he should rule and others should he 
ruled. Hence we may translate : " titles to rule and obedience," 
or " claims to rule and to be obeyed." This furnishes a better 
explanation of the genitives Trarpos and pir]Tp6<s than if we took 
a£t{o/xa to mean i-atio, with Ast, who translates '^ ratio de patre et 
matre,^' (So Jowett, who translates it ^^ principle." — Ficinus seems 
to have read irarkpa re koI p.r]T€pa, and Badham conjectures 
narepa'S re Kal p^yjrepas.) 

a 2. The connecting links need attention. The re after the 
first ev does not go with the next Kai, which means or, but with the 
re after the second ev. The re in to re, again, does not go with 
the Kttt next to it (which possibly also means or — see above on 
680 e 2), but with the Kat before oAws. 

a 4. The second of the two statements thus connected by re 
and Kai is almost a repetition of the first ; yoveas puts Trar/aos Kat 
pLTjrpos in a slightly more general form, and eKyoviov suggests a 
second or even a third generation as added to those who are to obey. 

380 



NOTES TO BOOK III 690 b 

b 6. CI. " A most compelling kind of rule, that " (i.e. " superior 
strength is indeed an unanswerable claim "). 

Ath. "Yes, and all over the animal kingdom it is the 
commonest kind of rule, and Pindar tells us that it is so ordained 
by Nature." 

b 8. Pindar's words, as quoted at Gorg. 484 b (where see 
Thompson's note) — and referred to at Gorg. 488 b and Laws 714 e 
and 890 a — do not contain the words Kara <f)va-iv or (f>va€i, though 
there, c 1, in expounding them, Plato uses the word <f)V(r€L, and at 
488 b TO Kara (f>v(TLv. Also, as Boeckh says, Hesychius has No^uos 
TravTwv 6 ISacrtkevs Kara rrjv <f)vcrtv. All these references point 
to the fact that Pindar spoke of " club-law " as " Nature's " law — 
in Wordsworth's words, " the good old rule " — and make it extremely 
likely that Boeckh (p. 178) was right in supposing that Kara 
(fiva-Lv had dropped out at Gorg. 484 b 6 after (fujcrtv. (Ast, 
agreeing with de Geer in thinking that Kara (f)v(TLV is too prosaic 
an expression to have occurred in Pindar, conjectures that (f>v(reL 
is what, has fallen out.) — Both here and at 890 a, it will be seen 
that Plato is not content with Pindar's dictum. — to 6e . . . 
Tre<f)VKVLav, " but there is a sixth title to rule which is the greatest 
of all ; that which ordains that the ignorant must follow, and the 
wise must lead and direct. And yet in this case (tovto), most 
sapient poet, I would venture to affirm that that which is really 
{7r€<j)VKVLav) the rule of law over willing subjects, where no com- 
pulsion is necessary, is not against Nature ; it is Nature's own 
arrangement." 

C 1. TovTo is probably adverbial ; cp. 677 d 1 and 686 c 4 : liter- 
ally, " in the case of," or '^ about this title." The rule of law must 
always be, if the law is rightly made (by the common sense of 
the community — Ikovtwv), the rule of wisdom (cp. below, 714 a 2 
rrjv Tov vov Scavofi-qv cTrovo/xa^ovTas vofiov), and the excellence of 
the governed is to acquiesce in it ; and excellence in man or 
community is, of course, what Nature demands. 

C 3. The words aAA.' ov f^taiov mark the contrast with the rule 
of/orce described above. (Stallb. takes t^v . . . a/a;)^*^^ as in apposi- 
tion to (fivorLv ; explaining that it is nature's law, not force that 
makes the ignorant obey the wise. But it is impossible so to 
explain away ttjv tov vo/xov dp)(7^v. It is possible, with Ast, to 
take TovTo and rrjv tov vofxov o.p)(7jv to be in apposition.) — Cp. 
Hdt. iii. 38 o/a^ws /xot SoKcec UlvSapos TrotrjcraL vofiov TrdvTUiv 
paaiXka (ftyjaa^ eivau 

C 5. The seventh title to rule, which depends on the decision 

381 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

of the lot, is 6€0(f>LX.i]<i, because the lot is believed to be the pro- 
nouncement of the divine will. The ruler too, himself, may be 
supposed to be the favourite of heaven. Cp. Phil. 39e 10 StKatos 
dvrjp evcre^r)? kol dyado'^ ttolvtids oip' ov 6eo(f)L\rj<s Icttiv; 

C 6. et's kXtjpov TLva Trpodyofxev : the words are difficult. I 
think they mean, " we bring (the seventh kind of ruler) before 
the tribunal of the lot in some form." Cp. 741b 5 6 vet/xas 
KX.rjpos o)v Oeos. 

C 7. aTTLovra dpx^o-Oat, " to take his place among the 
governed." — For the article with StKaiOTarov cp. 624 a 3. 

d 1 flf. " From all this," the Ath. proceeds, " we may see that 
the right to govern is not so simple as a man might think, and 
that there are so many kinds of claims to be a governor, that 
there may well arise discord in a state from their conflict. How- 
ever, our immediate business is to see what was the rock on which 
the governors of our primitive Dorian community split." 

d 2. irat^ovTes Trpo'^, " addressing our speculations to " ; cp. 
on Trat^co and TraiSta above on 685 a 6 f . The idea is that of 
"joining in the game" with the constitution-mongers. 

d 3. TT/oos dpxovras : Trpos is difficult ; apparently it is " which 
apply to" or "belong to, rulers," a rather curious variety of 
expression for the (a^tw/xara) rov re dp\eiv kol dpx^crdat of a 1. 
(Madvig would read Trepl for 7r/9os, and Schanz follows him ; but 
all difficulty does not vanish then.) — 6tl : an adverbial neuter ; 
" in what respect," i.e. " how inconsistent they all are with each 
other." And he goes on to say that his light-hearted framer of 
schemes of government will find these conflicting claims very hard 
to reconcile. 

d 5. OepaTreveiv is probably a medical metaphor : " treat." 

d 6. TTOJs T€ KOL T6 TTapd TttuTtt dfxapTovT€S '. i.e. which of these 
rights were outraged, or strained, by the kings of Argos and 
Messene. — For Trepi c. ace. in place of a gen. cp. above on 685 c 2 
and 688 c 5. We thus get back to the question which was put 
in 684 e 7, and again at 686 b 6, though here the scope is 
narrowed. 

e 1 flf. We have here an example of the nice applicability of 
Plato's illustrations. It is precisely the halving of the whole power 
that saves the Lacedaemonian dynasty. His readers, too, may well 
have remembered that /^acrtAv^a^ 8o)po(f)dyov's are mentioned in 
the immediately preceding lines of Hesiod — Op. et D. 38 f. (And 
yet Zeller could say that the quotation was not an apt one here !) 

e 2. ayi/o'/yo-avre? answers in proper form the question rt 

382 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

a/xapTovTes ; — "because they were blind to the fact that . . ." 
Cp. the way in which Plato introduces this favourite quotation 
at Eep. 466 c (where he is talking of the (possible) mistaken 
desire for self-aggrandizement on the part of the cfivXaKes) 
yvioa-eraL tov ' HcrtoSoy ort to) ovtl rjv (ro<f>o^ Aey(DV . . . 

e 4. fxerpLov is here used in two different senses : (1) that of 
''sufficient'' (cp. Phaedo 117b — of the dose of hemlock), and (2) 
that of ''moderate." — For the explanatory asyndeton introduced 
by oTTorav cp. on 685 c 6. Hermann rightly brackets oTrorav . . . 
X^Lpovo^ as a scholiast's " languida dicti Hesiodei interpretatio," 
and Schanz follows him. 

e7. kyyiyvea-Oai irepl fSacnXeas is "to arise in connexion 
with one of the kings " ; kyyiyvea-Oai kv rots St^^ois is simply 
" to have its rise among the populaces." 

e 8. The TTporepov is an important part of the question, and 
this part of it is answered by the Trpcorov in 691 a 3. 

691 a 1. TO fx€v eiKos Kttt TO TToXv, " to judge by probability 
and, experience." For the to cp. on 690 e 7 and 624 a 3. 
(Badham would read icm for kol.) 

a 2. In voarrjixa we have more distinctly the medical metaphor 
suggested at 690 d 5. It is very apt here, inasmuch as physical 
Tpvfji-q is a natural source of bodily disease. 

a 3 ff. ovKovv . . . 8L€<f>0€Lp€v ; " clearly the kings of that age 
were the first to be infected with the vice of self-aggrandizement 
at the expense of the laws of the land. Where they had promised, 
and even sworn, there they broke with themselves, and the dis- 
cord in tliem, being, as we have explained, most grievous folly, 
for all its apparent wisdom — that was what ruined the whole 
Dorian community by its distressing untuneful dissonance." 

a 4. €(TXov : the natural tense to denote the catching of a 
disease. — 6, which I have translated by " where," is adverbial ; lit. 
" in respect of that which they agreed to." 

a 7. TrAr^a/xeAeta : the musical metaphor is preserved here ; 
i.e. the word means a dissonance^ not an error in conduct. So at 
Rep. 349 6 the idea of TrAeove^ia is (by implication) pronounced to 
be repugnant to the mind of a /xovo-lkos dv-jp. to TrAeoveKTetv twv 
TcOevToyv vo/acov is what these kings are accused of. By such 
conduct they rudely break the harmony of their being, and so are 
guilty of the /xeyto-Tv; dpadia described at 689 a. 

b 2. For the arrangement of the two genitives and Tre/at cp. 
640 b 6 ov (TTpaTTOTreBov ivepi Atyo/xev dp^ovTO<i. 

b 7. For €ts w^th KaTiSovra — "by taking a look at" — cp. Hdt. 

383 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

V. 35. 10 KeXevcLV Kpio-rayopr^v ^vpyja-avrd fxtv rets rpi^as 
KaTiSecrOaL es t'^v K€c()a\-qv. — vfilv : because he included Megillus's 
fellow-countrymeii ; "what was done among you Sj)artans." — It is 
better to take paStov with eo-rtv, than to take the latter word to 
mean " it is possible," and supply another ecrrt with p<^8lov. 

b 11. TO o-a(f)€(TTaTov : the same use of the article as at 690 c 7. 
So we might say " that is what is certain," instead of " that is 
certain." 

C 1. Nearly all modern editors agree with Stallb. in rejecting 
SvvapLLv, which all MSS. have after cXdrroa-i : "manifestum illud 
grammatici interpolamentum, qui p^ei^ova neutrum pluralis esse 
nollet," Herm. 

C 2. A first wrote Trapicls, but corrected it to irapels, which is 
the reading of and Stobaeus. — rrapets to /xerptov, " paying no 
regard to j)roportion." Cp. Phil. 64 d 9 pkrpov koI Trjs (rvp.p,€Tpov 
(fiva-€(DS. There is the same quasi-moral significance attaching to 
the word p^erptos (whether used in the sense of " not excessive in 
either direction," or in that of "suited to," "proportioned to," i.q. 
a-v/x/x€T/oos, which again is used occasionally in the first sense of 
/x€T/)ios) as there is to crvpLcfiiovLa ; cp. Phil. 64 e 6 yuer/atoTy/s yap 
KOi o"u/x/x€T/3ta KctAA-os StJttov kul apeTt] TravTa^ou crvjxf^aivei 
yiyvea-dat. 

C 3. dvaTpeTrerat iravra : not " complete ruin results," but "ruin 
results in every case " ; rd p.ev is, in effect, " in the case of the over- 
fed body," and to, 8e " in the case of the overbalanced '/'^X'^-" 
(Cp. Julius Caesar, ii. i. 18, "The abuse of greatness is, when 
it disjoins Eemorse from power.") — With e^v/Spt^ovTa used 
metaphorically of bodily disorder cp. our "proud" flesh. We 
might perhaps translate : " breaking out here in rank flesh, and 
there in rank insolence (with its ofl'spring outrage)." 

C 4. With v/3p€(os €Kyovov dSiKtav cji. Soph. O.T. 873 v/Spt^ 
<f)VT€V€L TvpavvoVf which very likely was in the writer's mind. — 
TTLTTTeL is giveu in the margin of A as a variant for del, and may 
even have once stood in the text, (det seems to be a metaphor 
from the race-course, and not merely an application of the idea 
of swift movement, as is probably the case in the English 
expressions run to seed, run riot.) 

c 7. Ktti is or ; i.e. both experience and a sense of responsibility 
are necessary, if disaster is to be avoided. 

d 1. wcrre pr) . . . </)tXtov, " without getting its faculties 
thoroughly infected with the deadly disease of folly, and (thus) 
alienating its closest friends." — TrXyjpiodeLcra : in connexion with 

384 



NOTES TO BOOK III 691 d 

v6(Tov this word probably has something of the meaning of infect, 
which belongs to dvairLjxirkyjfxi and ai/otTrAews : cp. Rep. 496 d o/awi/ 
Tov<i aXXovs KaTaTTiixTT Xafxevov; dvofiias. — As to its case, the infin. 
with (ocrre, like other infins., has its subject in the nom. where 
it is identical with the subj. of the verb on which the infin. 
depends. Cp. Xen. Hell. iv. 8. 32 'Ava^LJSios fJihroL c^tAwv avruj 
yevofieviov twi' €cf>op(i)V, ^wrrpd^aro wcrTe avros CKirAcvcrat dpfxocTTyj^ 
€is "AfivSov. 

d 2. avrrj's : i.e. Trj<s xj/vXT^s. — Sidvoia is the intelligence, or 
thinking power of the man ; ^vx^q being used something in the 
way in which we say ' soul ' for ' man,' when we say " there was 
not a soul there." (Badham would read avTr)v St' civotav.) 

d 3. Bucf)d€Lp€V : gnomic aorist. — avTiqv : i.e. rrjv Ovrjrrjs ^V)(rj<s 
<f>vcrLv. 

d4. rovTo . . . vopiodeToyv, "it would take a great lawgiver 
so to be inspired with a sense of fitness as to guard against this." 
At b 1 TL (with evXafS-qOrjvai) was the ace. of the inner object ; here 
TovTo'(with €v\a/Srj8rjvaL) is ace. of thing guarded against. 

d 5. u)S ovv ... TO 8' eoLKev elvat : I have adopted Burnet's 
stopping and arrangement of this passage (he puts a comma after 
y€v6iJL€vov, a colon after roTracrat, reads to 8' for to8' and puts a 
— after eivac), and take yevofievov to be an absolute construction, 
and 0)5 ., . y€v6fjL€vov as dependent on roTrda-ai, in the same way 
that at 624 a 7 ws tov M.lv(d ^oitwvtos depends on Aeyct? : " we 
can at the present day form a reasonable conjecture that this end 
was then secured" (i.e. that the danger was guarded against). 
" But in point of fact, there seems to have been — " CI. " What ? " 
Ath. " a special providence watching over you," etc. For the to 8' 
cp. 684 c 7, 731 e 3, Apol. 23 a, Rep. 340 d 7. (It seems to me that 
the passage would gain in directness if we read yevofxeviov : " that 
there were great lawgivers at that day we have now every reason 
to conjecture ; but no legislator could have arranged for the birth 
of twins.") (Ast put in to before totc ; all the early printed 
texts from Aid. to Stallb. (except Bekker) had OL/Mai for the second 
eivai. This necessitated the supplying, in thought, of ecrrL with 
Oios TL<5 ; Schanz substitutes ety dv for etvat.) 

el. €K p^ovoyevovs, "instead of a single born king," as there 
had been before. This seems better than to take ck as merely 
" from," i.e. " born from." — ei's to p.krpiov p.dXkov a-vvecTTeiXe, 
"brought them within a more reasonable compass," i.e. by halving 
the kingly power. 

e 2. pL€pL€iyp,€vr] Oiia tlvI 8vvdp.€L : this probably refers to the 

VOL. I 385 2 Q 



691 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

direction Lycurgns was supposed to have received from Apollo's 
oracle at Delphi (cp. 624 a 5). 

e 3. ixciyvvcriv : cp. Plut. Lye. ch. v. ttAciovcov Se Kaivo- 
TOfiovfievoyv vtto tov AvKO'vpyov irpwTov rjv Kal fxeyia-Tov rj 
KaTdfTTacTLS TWi' yepoi'Toyv ijv (fiTjcriv 6 HXdrMV rrj rdv /^acriAewi/ 
^PXO <^A,6y/xaivoi;cr7y /xt^^eiaav, koI yevo/Jievrjv l(T6\pri<j>ov tls ra 
/xeyttrra, croyTrjpcav dfxa Kai (TU)cf)poa-vvr]V Trapac\eiv. 

692 a 1. For Kara yrjpas and Kara yevos cp. above on 685 c 2. 
a 3. o 8e rptros crMT-qp : Plutarch {Lye. ch. vii.), in quoting 
a good deal of this passage, attributes the institution of the 
ephorate to the men of a period a hundred and thirty years later 
than Lycurgus. At Epistle viii. 354 b both the senate of old 
men, and the ephorate, are attributed to Lycurgus ; as also they 
are by Herodotus (i. 65). Aristotle, Pol. v. 9. 1, says Theopompus 
established the ephorate, and he would seem to be the rpiTos 
cnoTTijp spoken of here by Plato. (For further references see Ast's 
and Stallb.'s notes.) — The words rptros (Tuyr-qp recall the to rpirov 
Tw crcoTrjpi — the third cup in honour of Zei^s ^lar-qp (cp. Phil. 
66 d, and see Heindorfs note on Charm. 167 a 9). 

a 5. kyym . . . Swa/Aews : Aristotle, Pol. ii. 6. 16, speaks of 
the ephors as oVre? 01 rv^ovres, and says that the method of their 
election was TraLSapLcoB-q^ Atar, so that Plato's words here in 
describing the ephors as "as good as elected by lot," are justified 
(cp. Grote ii. ch. 6). — The five-fold repetition of the word 
8vvaixL<s in this passage, like the repeated en in the early part of 
it, are marks of rapid and unrevised writing. Plato takes 
very little pains about the statement of historical facts. It is 
the point they are to illustrate that is important. Hence the 
polishing of such a passage as this was naturally left till the last 
— and was never done. 

a 7. 1^ S)v eSet ; we might almost say that a^tw/Aarwv may be 
supplied, in thought, with S)v : the reference to the lot, and to 
birth, and to the wisdom of the old men recalls the previous list 
of d^iiopLara rov dp)(€LV Kal dpyecrOai. 

a 8. p^erpov exovcra, " being duly regulated " or " limited." 
Cp. above els to pierpLov (TvvccrTeLXe. — tols dXXois : i.e. the rest of 
Hellas. 

b 1. €7rt ye Ti^/xevw Kal KpecrcfiovTr), " if it had been in the 
hands of Temenus and Cresphontes." 

b 2. 17 'ApLCTToSyjpLov pbepis : i.e. Lacedaemon. 
b 4. crxeSov yap ktA., "else they would hardly have imagined 
that they sufiiciently curbed by (coronation) oaths a youthful 

386 



NOTES TO BOOK III 692 b 

disposition, on its accession to a power which might easily 
degenerate into a despotism." It is difficult to be sure of the 
exact force of lo-QOrjcrav av fieTptaa-ai : I think the choice lies 
between "would have imagined they moderated," and "would 
have imagined it proper to moderate," i.e. that it was the right 
thing to moderate, oifiat Seiv is so common a phrase that the 
Selv may be omitted ; cp. Goi-g. 472 c where ov eyo) av olfxaL is 
replaced at 474 a by olov eyw oI/naL Seiv etvai. (There is no 
indication that oifxai with an inf. ever had the meaning expect (to 
do), which the Eng. think (to do) sometimes has, and which would 
suit this passage exactly — " I did not think to draw my sword 
'gainst Pompey " Ant. and Cle. 11. ii. 158. — Cornarius's trans- 
lation, which Ast quotes with approval, is "alioqui nunquam 
putavissent se redacturos esse." At Ale. I. 126 e olfxat Aeyetv may 
mean " I mean," or " wish to say," but most likely it is " I think 
that I mean." — H. Richards would boldly read /xer/otao^at av, or 
fx^Tpida-eiv. See below on 812 b 5, and cp. Goodwin, M. and T. 
§127.) 

b 7. A, L and have /xev oZa-av ; a late hand in A, and 
Boeckh, suggested fxkvova-av ; Ven, 184 (Bekker's H) has /xevowav, 
which is doubtless right. 

C 1. vvv fJL€v yevofxevov : the emphasis is on the vvv, '* arrived 
at now " — " the recognition of this truth by us now implies no 
special wisdom." — efxTrpocrOev : i.e. at 691 b 3. 

C 3. Here the emphasis is on the t6t€. 

C 4. fitav €K TpiQiv [i.e. ap^Mv] iroirjcraL : the three are not, I 
believe, the three states of Sparta, Argos, and Messene, but the 
three elements of power contained in the TJirone, the Gerousia, 
and the Ephorate. The only unity of states which seems to be 
in the author's mind here is that of Hellas as a whole — the rj/xuiv 
of c 7 ; also, the close connexion of the words fxtav Ik rpiCiv 
iroLrjcraL with fxeTpLacraL ras dp\d<s suggests that they refer to the 
mutual checks exercised by the three above-mentioned authorities 
at Sparta, which resulted in the moderation of power desired. 

C 5. TO, voriOevra KaXd rore : i.e. that excellent (mixed) form 
of government. If legislators had been wise enough to see all 
this, the right constitution would have been set up in all 
three states. As it was, it was not legislators' wisdom but the 
providential birth of twins in the royal house which set Sparta 
in the right way. (Ast, in a note on cru/x/xet/cro? yevofiivrj at a 7, 
quotes passages from many ancient authors dealing with the 
combination of several elements of power in a government.) 

387 



692 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 7. Heindorf, on Soph. 242 c Sirjy^ia-daL iraLcrlv ws o^o-ii^ 
rjfjLLv, collects the following instances of a like arrangement of 
words : Laws 645 b, Polit. 260 c, Phil. 18 d. 

d 4 ff. TO TrpwTov fxkv . . . Kara Kpdros : a puzzling passage. 
Notwithstanding its curious position, the fiev with its Se has 
nothing to contrast but /xiav and to) 8vo. ajjivvai seems to mean 
" to take up arms," eira/xvi^eiVj " to arrive on the field of battle." 
TO TT/owTov : i.e. in the Marathonian war. 

d 6. 8e, " while," or " and moreover." — ^u^dapfjikva : it is 
noticeable that the same sort of term is applied to the corruption 
of the body 'politic, as would be applied to moral corruption in 
a single man. (See above 689 a 7.) The sin of the two recreant 
cities is want of internal o-v/xc^wvta, and this is accurately re- 
produced, on a larger scale, by the hostility shown by them to 
Sparta and the whole of Hellas, respectively. 

d 7. TToXefjiovcra : as we have seen before, Plato is not writing 
history ; he uses his memory of history, or even, perhaps, his 
conception of what the course of history might have been, to 
furnish illustrations of his argument. It seems certain that 
there was 7iot war between Sparta and Messene at the time of 
Mardonius's invasion, though the two states were old antagonists. 
Possibly the misstatement has here a dramatic reason : the 
Athenian may well be supposed reluctant to recall the real 
behaviour of Sparta at the time, to the mind of Megillus. Below, 
at 698 e, it is suggested that there may have been another reason 
for the SjDartan inaction. 

e 1. For 7r€/)t (bis) cp. above 685 c 4 and 688 c 5. 

e 2. ovd' vTr-qKovcrev ovt rj/xuvev : we have here a suggestion 
that Sparta did all it could in responding (vTraKomiv) to the 
summons of Hellas, and promising assistance. Argos did not even 
do that ; it was philo- Persian. (I see no reason for Ritter's pro- 
posed insertion of avr-q before yjixvvev.) — TroXXa Se ktA., "besides 
that (8e), if a man were to relate the history of that time, he 
would find many hard things to say about the conduct of Hellas 
in the 'Persian war." There are several other ways in which the 
words of this passage might be taken. Ast, Schneider, and Burnet 
take irepl Ik. t. TroXe/xov with yevofieva. But, with this arrange- 
ment, TOTc and Trepl Ik. t. it. are oppressively tautological. 
Though strictly, I think, Aeywi/ only governs ra Tore yevojxeva, 
its position suggests that it is to be supplied, in idea, with 
KaTTjyopoi, in the form of " in the course of his story." 

e 4. ov8' av ktA., " in fact, he could not (properly) say that 

388 



NOTES TO BOOK III 6926 

Hellas did defend itself at all. No : if the allied Athenians and 
Lacedaemonians had not repelled the threatened slavery, the Greek 
races would by this time " (liave lost their individuality, and 
would have sunk to the grievous plight of the isolated Greek 
cities within the Persian dominions). 

e 6. Koivfj Scavo-qfia, "unanimity"; almost a compound verbal 
noun, formed from Kotvy ScavoeLcrOaL. So, in English, we might 
occasionally make an adverbial phrase qualify a verbal noun, and, 
e.g., from ^^all but explode" form "an all hut explosion." (Cp. 
Tennyson's "Sweet Catullus's ail-but island" in "Prater ave 
atque vale.") 

693 a 3. KaBairep . . . KarotKeiTai : the antecedent to ' &v 
may be yevT^, or "EAAt^vcs, or even avOpiaTroi. 

a 4. SiaTrecfiopr^/jieva refers to the dispersion of the inhabitants 
of e.g. Greek states, (Tvjji7r€<f)opr]ixeva to their incorporation into 
communities of (idpf^apoi. Cp. Grote, ch. xxxiii. p. 162, "the 
empire of the Great King was then an aggregate of heterogeneous 
elements, cemented together by no tie except that of common fear 
and subjection — no way coherent nor self-supporting, nor pervaded 
by any common system or spirit of nationality." And later, p. 177, 
" wholesale translations of inhabitants from one place to another 
were familiar to the mind of a Persian satrap." — It is very 
tempting to adopt Cobet's belief that kcnrapiikva is a marginal 
explanation of 8ia7re(f>opr]ix€va which has no right to a place in 
the text. In that case KaKws KaroiKctrat is "lead a miserable 
existence." If the word be retained, it will be " lead a miserable 
sporadic existence," k(nrapp.kva being joined adverbially to 
KaTotKciTat, and KaKws qualifying both words. 

a 5. ravT (.^(opev €7riTt/xav, " these faults I will venture to find 
with . . . " ; an answer to Megillus's question at 685 a 1 ttws 8r; 
Kai TL fjL€fx(f)oix€vo<i avTMV Acycts / 

a 6. XeyofxhoLs is a slight apology for the use of the term 

TToAlTlKOtS. 

a 7. In adding Kal rots vvv he probably has in mind the 
contemporary Persian despotism into which their ayaeiKTo? o-p^-q 
had degenerated. — tVa . . . aAAo, "and my reason for finding 
fault is this : I hope, by investigating the causes of the errors, 
to discover what course, different from that which was taken, 
ought to have been taken." — Ritter, unlike all other interpreters, 
takes avTwv to be masc, and ras atrias to mean the charges 
(brought against them) — a suggestion not to be lightly rejected ; 
but (1) it seems better to take ravra (a 5), avriov (a 7), and ravra 

389 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(b 1) all to refer to the same thing — i.e. the legislators' errors ; (2) 
the desired discovery of the right course {dvivpLa-Kiofxev kt\.) is 
more likely to follow an investigation of causes than of charges ; 
and (3) the gen. avrcov in that sense would be unusual. 

b 2. TO Tvapov = vvvh-q, and is so fixed by the tense of eiTrofxev. 
Cp. Rep. 487 c 4 Aeyw 8' els to irapov aTrof^Xexj/as (of the discussion 
so far as it had gone). — apa is the equivalent of modern quotation 
marks, and the ov Set . . . vofjLodereiv is clearly the recapitulation 
of the results previously arrived at in the discussion, but it is not 
made clear whether the following three grounds for the said 
conclusions are stated as self-evident truths, or whether they are 
statements, in a new form, of points previously brought out in 
the argument. The latter, I think, is the case ; inasmuch as (1) 
despotism, (2) folly, and (3) unpatriotic dislike (691 d 2) of one's 
fellow citizens and failure to help one's allies — three faults which 
he has enlarged on — are respectively inconsistent with the (1) 
freedom, (2) wisdom and (3) fellow-feeling here desiderated ; for (3) 
cp. 628 a 3 and c 10. The following words seem prompted by a 
feeling that the reference to his previous views has not been quite 
explicit enough. 

b 6. TToXkaKis, " perhaps." 

C 2. TT/oos TO (T(x)(fipoveiv '. Badham says the whole argument is 
spoilt, unless we read tt/oos to eXevOepov here ; Schanz would 
reject the three words (partly because as originally written the 
text of A omitted the r/ before tt/oos in c 3, as also did 0). — If 
we retain the MS. text we must assume that orav (^Qifxev does not 
mean "when we say, as we do now" but introduces a general 
instance of different ways of putting the same thing, and not 
a repetition of the instance that has just occurred — cruxfipocrvvy] 
being substituted for eXevOepia, because it does not admit of 
excess. The best illustration of the identification of o-ox^pocrvvq 
with (fipovqcTLs and true public spirit is the passage in the 
Republic which deals with cr(o(f>poa-vvT] as the virtue of a state — 
430d-432a. Plato there likens it to a appLovta (431 e), and 
further, at 432 a 6, calls it a 6/xovota, and a x^t/aovos tc Kal 
dfxeivovos Kara cfiViTtv (Tv/ji<fi(x)VLa, defining it at 431 d 7 as the 
condition when 7} avri] 86^a €V€(ttl tocs t€ dpxovo-i Kal dp^op^evois 
irepl Tov ovcTTLvas Set dp)(^€iv'. (The (f>p6vT](rLS or vovs of a state is 
thus distinguished from the cro<^ia which is the virtue peculiar to 
the dpxovT€<s, and is described at Rep. 428f,-429a.) — Bruns 
(p. 170) regards this explanation as too simple (" waiv ") and self- 
evident a piece of botcher's work to need a refutation. 

390 ' 



NOTES TO BOOK III 693 c 

C 4 f . Kal aAAa 8r) ttoAAoL ktX. : i.e. ** many other expressions, 
which would mean the same thing." — I cannot help wondering 
whether we ought not to read KaTroyp-q/xaTa for py/xara here. 

C 6. TreipaaroixeOa : the fut., which A's scribe corrected to 
the subj., is the better reading. Cleinias says they will try and 
reconcile the different parts of the argument in the way suggested. 
— €7raviovT€s Tovs Aoyoi's, "going back (in our minds) over the 
previous course of our discussion." 

C 8. Badham rejects f^ovXo/xevoSj calling it a putidum emblema, 
and Schanz agrees. Without fiovXojxevos the sentence means : 
" (with regard to ^., (f)p. and A. tell us) at what you were going to 
say that the legislator ought to aim " ; with ^ovAo/xevos, though 
difficult, it may mean : " (tell us) at what you meant the legislator 
ought to aim when you were about to speak (about those things)." 
l3ovX6p.evos e/xeXXes X.€yeLV is equivalent to efSovXov Aeyeti/, /xeAAwv 
Acyetv, the Aeyetv doing duty twice — a natural conversational 
irregularity. There is perhaps a reference to the ySovAo/xevos in 
the ISovkerai at e 1. (I cannot imagine any reader putting in 
/3ovX.6jjL€vo<s. Ritter would prefer, of the two, to reject Sctv rather 
than /3ovX6iJL€vo<s ; rightly, I think. — Apelt, p. 6, comparing 
iTTLX^Lpoiv Acyetv at 780 d, suggests that e/xeAAes means 
" cunctabaris " — i.e. " you wanted to say, but it did not come out.") 

d 2. aKovcTov 8iq vvv : the main subject of Book III. — the 
elementary form of a state — the TroAtretas a/^X'*? spoken of in the 
first line of the book — now comes more clearly into view. What 
has been said before enables us to understand the principles on 
which the following judgements are pronounced, and, e.g., the 
meaning of sanity {a-ox^pocrvvq), and its opposite insanity (avota), 
as applied to the mutual relations of the members of a political 
community. 

d 5. (XKpov e^eiv : with this we must supply Aeywv civ rts 
o/3^ws Aeyot. The sentence means : " the former polity has reached 
its fullest development among the Persians ; the latter among 
ourselves." 

d6. KadoLTrep eiTTov I take to refer to the immediately preced- 
ing €^ S>v ras aAAas yeyovevat ktA. Stallb. thinks there is a 
reference to the necessity of /xei^ts spoken of at 691 de and 692 a. 

d 7. hLaTreKoiKiXpkvai : the metaphor is from the blending of 
colours in a woven cloth ; cp. below 863 a 6, where the word is 
used to describe the mixing up of two distinct questions. 

d 8. Both elements are necessary. Untempered freedom — the 
absence of all authority — means that each man does wliat he likes. 

391 



693 d 't'HE LAWS OF PLATO 

No concerted action of any kind is possible in the state. Un- 
tempered, irresponsible autocracy means that, though the state acts 
as one man, i.e. possesses unity, and though, possibly, its actions 
may be guided by (fipourja-Ls, there is no (^lAta. — Aristotle at Pol. 
1266 a 1 speaks as if Plato had wanted to mix the two elements 
when at their worst, instead of letting them modify each other. 
Authority in any form — e.g. in that of al8w<s, 698 b 5 — is, in a 
sense, €k rvpavviBos (jxovap^Lai) y^yovos. 

e 1. ^iA.ta /x€Ta (f)povi](Tfi(os : as at b 4 and c 3 the two go 
together. Concerted action is not enough, unless there is wisdom to 
direct it. (But it is not to be imagined, he would doubtless add, 
that (f>p6vT](Tis could accompany unadulterated iXevOepia.) Kitter 
reminds us that at 628 b c the danger of crrao-ts is mentioned, and 
the necessity of elp-qvr] Trpos dX.\rjXovs ajxa kol cjaXocfipocrvvi] ; also 
that at 640 c 9 a (fipovijxos ap^uiv was said to be as necessary for a 
(Tvvova-La crvfnroTCJv as for an army. — o St) jSovXerai rj/xiv 6 X6yo<s 
TrpocrraTTeiv : this does not mean that the logos has proved it 
already. The Ath. foretells that this conclusion is inevitable. As 
explained at a 7, he investigates failure in the hope that if its 
causes are discovered, the wanderer may be put in the right path. 
Thus at e 9 he says, " we must point out the causes." 

e 6. fJi€L^6v(ji)s r) e8ei fxovoVj " overmuch, and to the exclusion of 
the other." — to, ficTpia tovtcov, " the right measure of the two 
elements." 

e 8. ovTio TTws, "succeeded more or less in doing the same," i.e. 
in achieving a proper combination of the two elements 

694 a 1. TO. atrca (see above on el): i.e. the causes of their 
later degeneracy. 

a 3. TO jxecrov . . . rjy oi' : yjyov is used, as is dyayovTOtv below 
at 701 e 6 (and perhaps dyovres below 1. 7), in the sense of to take a 
certain course. I have followed Schanz in adopting Hertlein's 
p.k(Tov for the MS. /xer/Jtov, mainly because, though it is natural 
enough that Plato should describe the Persians and Cyrus as in a 
state midway between slavery and freedom^ it is not natural that he 
should say they had the right amount of slavery ; he would have 
found a less obnoxious word than SovAeta to describe the opposite 
of iXevdepia, when urging the necessity of a certain amount of it. 
— fxdXXov means " more than at a later time." 

a 5. eVeiTa Se dXXcjjv ttoXXiov Sea-TTOTac : as immediately 
explained, this circumstance gives a larger scope to the liberality of 
their disposition. 

a 6. dp)^ovT€s, ixeraSiSovTeSy dyovres : inasmuch as cf>iXoi '>y(rav 

392 



NOTES TO BOOK III 694 a 

ha«! (TTpaTLioTaL for subject, we must regard these nominatives as 
absolute (cp. Jebb's note on Soph. Ant. 260, where he says that 
(f)vka^ ikeyx^ov <f>vkaKa is virtually equivalent to a gen. abs.). — In 
the parallel sentence that follows at b 2 we have the gen. abs. in 
the corresponding place. No doubt the variety of construction 
was intentionaL — ap^ovres may mean the ruling class among the 
Persians, or the Persians proper, regarded as the rulers of the 
subject nations just referred to. 

b 4. €15 Tt : Burnet's note is : " cts rt L ^ (o- s. v.) ; et tl 0; rt A 
(sed €L s.v. A2)." I have adopted Burnet's solution of this interest- 
ing puzzle, rather than Schanz's (who prints tl with A), mainly 
because " able to advise about any matter " makes so much better 
sense here than " at all able to advise." et? may well have been 
omitted by mistake after tov<s, though it is difficult to see where 
€1 came from. Perhaps A corrected his n to et rt from a com- 
parison of or its like, and we must then also suppose that 
merely omitted the s by mistake. It is curious that in some 
inferior MSS. the s was transposed to the second word, et rts. — 
KOLvrjv ktA. : what wisdom there was in individuals was thus 
available for the community. Cp. vov KOLvoiviav below. — These 
counsellors i'urnish an informal counterpart to the Spartan Senate 
of old men. — cTreSwKev is Steph.'s manifestly right correction of the 
MS. aTreStoKcv. 

C 2. /xavreta xpwfxeOa : a playfully grandiloquent phrase for 
what we should call " making a shrewd guess." 

C 4. The MS. tovto, if correct, is not the antecedent of oTre/o, 
but the subj. of (^e/oet ; it can hardly be both. It is generally 
interpreted : "this (explanation) at all events brings our investiga- 
tion to the goal for which we started." But surely for this we 
ought to have Tr\v crKexftv, and the tovto is awkward. Stallb. 
translates <j)€p€i t)fjiLv a-KixpLV perducit nobis consideraiionem ; but the 
rest does not fit in easily. Badham ingeniously suggested tov for 
TOVTO, '' it heljis us to consider the thing we started to find." 
Schanz adopts this, and I follow him. For the tov before a 
relative clause cp. Phaedo 75 b 1 o/oeycTat tov o ecrTtv tcrov ; so in 
Homer B841 twv 01 Adpicrav epLfScoXaKa vatcTaao"KOv. 

C 5. fxavTevofiai : cp. above on c 2. — Ast is perhaps right in 
preferring S-q vvv to 8^ vvv. 

C 6. Athenaeus, who quotes this passage (xi. 505 a) to show that 
Plato had a spite against Xenophon, has, besides some minor variants, 
<^iXo7rovov for </)iAo7roAti/. Stallb. cps. Ajpol. 24 b lsik\y]Tov tov 
aya^di' tc kuX (^lXottoXlv ws <f)rj(rLV. For aTpaTrj-yos certainly <J)lX6- 

393 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

TTovo? seems a more suitable epithet ; for all that it may not be what 
Plato wrote. Athenaeus, in his coarse abuse of the great philosopher, 
is not likely to have been very careful to quote him exactly. — Plato 
doubtless had in mind here the author of the Cyropaedia and the 
Oeconomicus, and meant this, as Kitter says, as a deliberate protest 
against the system of education described in the former book. 

C 7. rj<f)Oai : cp. our conversational use of " tackle " (a subject) ; 
it denotes a mere dealing with the subject, not a devoted study of it. 
Hence Ast's ov^l for ov^lv is out of place, i.e. there could be no 
heightening of the force of the negative. — It is possible that we 
ought to read for ov^lv rov vow, ovS' yTiviovv ; Ath. has ov ^tj 
TLVL ovv. 

d 2. evSai/jLovas . . . Kal fxaKaptovs : the two words occur 
together at Eep. 354 a ; here they mean " fortune's favourites " — 
specially gifted and guided by a higher power. 

d 3. y]87]^ " from their birth." 

d 4. TovT(x)v {ovSevos eTTiSeeLs) : this word, w^hich Badham would 
reject, must refer to the advantages implied in the application of 
the words evSaifiovas and fxaKaptovs, " rolling in luxury," as we 
should say. Cp. 715 b 8, where rcov rotovToiv refers to what is 
implied in the previous ttXovctlos rts. 

d 6. €7raiv€Lv T€ dvayKa^ovcraL ktA. : a classical example of such 
conduct in modern literature is furnished by Countess GruffanufPs 
educational methods with the Princess Angelica. — The break in the 
construction, which leaves the jx-jre "in the air," is in the familiar 
'conversational style. 

d 7. TOLovTovs TLvds '. Le. " in complete licence." 

el. ywaiKecav fxev ovv ktA., "what could you expect of a 
bringing up by women — M'omen of the royal seraglio — new to their 
high station, with never a man to advise them ? " 

e 6. avTOLs av . . . eKTaro, " was all the time acquiring for 
them." — But with the " flocks " he did not secure for them the 
shepherd's training ; a literary conceit. 

695 ^ 2. Ast rejected the words Ile/ocriKi^i/ ... to iKyoviov as a 
manifestly alienum additamentum, and Schanz follows him. The 
23assage certainly reads on admirably if crKXyjpdv follows ovcravj but 
there is this special reason, noticed by Stallb., for thinking TLepcTLKrjv 
genuine, that MtjSlktJv at a 7 gains special point as a contrast to 
UepcrtKrjv ; so that I should only agree to Ast's rejection, if Tr)v 
MriSLKrjv were rejected as well. I cannot believe Stallb. is right in 
rejecting only IIe/9crtK7^i/. The separation of ovaav from its predicate 
(TKXripdv (in that case) by the circumstantial absolute clause seems 

394 



NOTES TO BOOK III 695 a 

impossibly awkward. The best way out of tbe difficulty seems 
to be furnished by Burnet's insertion of two parenthesis marks, one 
after UcpcrLKijVf and the other after eKy6vo)v ; o-KXtj/jav ktA. then 
reads as an epexegetical apposition to Hepa-LKrjv. 

a 6. Tvys Aeyo/xev?;^ evSat/xovias : almost " their boasted pre- 
ciousness," i.e. the notion that, not being " common human clay," 
they must be subject to no such restraint or correction as ordinary 
boys receive. — The sentence is very complex : t€ does not connect 
8L€<f>0apixevr]v with TratSev^ci/ra? — in that case we should have 
had W/v TraiSetav — but re and kul connect yvvaiKuyv with €vvov\(x}v ; 
TracSeiav is "ace. of inner object" to TraiSevdevTas ; the first 
vTTo clause depends on 8L€(f)6apix€vr)v (which is merely attributive 
to TraiSeLav), the second on TratSevOevTas ; rrjv Mi^SiKrjv is epexegetic 
to (8L€(f)dapiJi€vqv) TratSetav. It was not that the Median way of 
education was ruined, but that the education, ruined as aforesaid, 
was a genuine Median one. 

b 1. OLOvs '^v avTovs eiKos yevecrdai : much the same in effect 
as the TOLovrov<s tlvols at 694 d 7. 

b 2. For the absolue use of TrapaXa^ovre^ — cp. our absolute use 
of " to succeed " — Ast cps. Critias 109 d 3 8ta ras roiv irapaXap-fSa- 
vovTiov (fyOopds ; so too tois TrapaXajxI^dvovcri at Ar. Pol. 1285 b 8. 

b 3. /jtecTTot goes adverbially with 7rapaXal36vT€<s — " succeeding in 
a state of complete and unbridled self-indulgence." (Badham says 
Trap, cannot stand without rrjv apx-jv, and /xeo-ro t wants a participle, 
e.g. yevo/xevoL, and marks a lacuna after Kvpov.) 

b 6. d7rai8€V(Tia<s : a telling substitute here for dvoias or 

b 7. Tov Xeyopievov totc €vvov\ov : it is not known on what 
authority the Magian pretender is so described. So at Epist. vii. 
332 a KOLViDVOLS 5e fxovov rrj<s tov M-qSov re Kal €vvov)(^ov )(^eLpio(re(i)s. 
— KaTa(f)povq(TavTos agrees in sense with MTyStuv as well as with 
evvov)(^ov ; so at c 4 Aapeiov kol twi/ cTrra are not to be separated : 
D. was one of the seven. (Valckenaer on Hdt. iii. 86 proposed to 
read 6^ for e-n-Ta here.) 

C 6. T(^ Aoyo) : not story, but the same personified Aoyos last 
referred to at 693 e 1. " Let us see" he says, in effect, "what the 
Adyo9 has to teach us by the course of events." Cp. below e 6 d)9 
6 e/xos Aoyos. — A reference to the above-quoted passage from Ep. 
viL — cSci^ei/ T€ [Aa^etos] TrapaSeiyfia otov xprj tov vofioOeTrju Kal 
(Saa-iXea toi' dyaOov yiyvecrdaL — and a comparison of the descrip- 
tion (at 691 e ff.) of the wise measures adopted for consolidating the 
Spartan constitution, show us that the Ath. is here bringing forward 

395 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

proofs of Drarius's political wisdom ; he shared his own power with 
others, and made his people one in spirit. Like Cyrus, he was 
ffaXoTToXis. 

C 8. H. Richards would add avros to €^8o/>to9, but it is hard to 
see how such a natural addition should have dropped out ; and 
€/?8o/xo5 by itself emphasizes more the fact that D. associated six 
others with himself in the government. — The same division into 
seven satrapies is mentioned at Ep. vii. I.e. Hdt. iii. 89 says D. 
divided his kingdom into twenty satrapies. 

c 10. Kal v6fxov<5 . . . otKetv, *' and set himself to govern by laws 
of his own making " (whereby he gave his people egalite). 

d 2. ets Tov vojxov eveSei, " regulated by fixed decree." The 
context (on both sides) shows that D., instead of keeping the tribute 
paid by the subject races, divided it among his Persian subjects ; 
another abandonment of arbitrary power. 

d 7. w Aapete . . . Ka/xjSvcnfjv : Burnet follows Stallb. in 
marking off this passa'ge as an animated — one might ahnost say 
an agitated — parenthesis ; and this is the best way out of the 
difficulty. — 6 Se resumes the thread of the interrupted sentence, 
of which 'Bi^p^rjs is the subject, very naturally. — Stallb. compares 
aptly such " tragic " adjurations as that which begins Euripides's 
Alcestis — w 8a>fxaT 'ASfx-qTei' Iv ots ktA., where the relative 
sentence contains all that is said about the vocative. — We might 
paraphrase here : " To think that you should have been blind to 
Cyrus's blunders ! " 

d 8. tcTMs is a sort of apology for the strangeness of the 
adjuration — something like an " I think you will admit." (Steph. 
would read an exclamatory w? for os ; Ast would reject os ; 
Herm. brackets the whole passage — but U^p^rjs badly wants a 
verb, especially with 6 8e following ; Peipers, Quaest. Grit de 
PL Legg. p. 81, accepts Hermann's athetesis and rejects 6 Se as 
well ; Badham marks a lacuna after He/a^r;?, and Schanz follows 
him.) 

e 2. o 8e . . . TraOyj/xao-LV, " Xerxes, I say, being a product of 
the same kind of education, duly reproduced Cambyses' career." 
(Ast, Lex., gives aTrcreAeo-ev the meaning passus est.) 

e 4. €K ye rocrovTov, " ever since," " from that day to this." 
e 5. TrXrjv ye ovo/xarL : this, coming after dXr)Ou)<s, is tauto- 
logical, but apparently Plato could not resist the temptation to 
play with the word jxeyas. (It is possible that it is not Plato, 
who says it, but a commentator, making explicit the hint which 
already lay in the dXrjOCis.) 

396 



I 



NOTES TO BOOK III 6956 

e 6. For the MS. tt'x^? Steph., Ast, Herni., and Schanz read 
Tvx^]' But similar genitives occur at Antiphon, De ,caede Herodis 
§ 92 TO fi€V yap dKovcriov a/xapT>^/xa, w av8p€<s, rrjs tvxV^ tcrrt, 
TO Se €K0V(TL0V Trjs yi/(o/xry5, and at Thuc. i. 142. 9 to Se vavriKov 
T^x^-qs €o-TiV ; the gen. is equal to an adjective: "the cause is 
no accidental oneJ' It is explained, 696 a 2 f., that the same 
effect always follows ; and we must supply atVtdv lo-Ttv with 
6 KttKos /?ios. — (OS o 6/x.os Aoyos : cj). above on c 6. 

■ 696 a 1 f . This Kai means and^ but those in a 2 mean or. The 
father must be excessively rich, and also possess unrestricted sway 
over his fellows. Even then the to, ttoAAci allows exceptions ; but 
if the bringing up is the dveirtTrXrjKTO^ rpocfy-q above described, 
excellence is out of the question, 

a 2. " Boy or man, however long he live," i.e. the effect of the 
bad education will last a lifetime. 

a 3. T(^ vofjiodeTrj crK€7rT€ov, kol rj/MLV 8e iv tw vvv irapovTi : 
the lawgiver, for practical purposes, we, at present, for theoretical. 
Such a' remark as this prepares the ground for the dramatic fiction 
of a new Cretan Colony, which serves to mark the transition at 
the beginning of the fourth book from the purely theoretical to 
the practical part of the treatise. 

a 6 f. All the Kai's in these two lines are or ; if the conjunction 
before rpocf>-qv had stood alone, it would probably have been ovSe. 
— 7r€VL(^ ktX.j " whether to rich or poor, subject or prince." 

a 7. Tpo(f>-qv : Boeckh, in confuting Cornarius's plausible substi- 
tution of oipXV^ for this word, quotes Ar. Pol. 1294 b 22 o/aoiws 
yap ol Tiov irXova-Liov TpecftovTac toi<s to)v ttcvt^twv (of the 
Lacedaemonians). He also says : "To Kar dpxas Oeiov est Lycurgus, 
(fivcTLS dvOpoiTTivr], fxejxLyfxevrj Oiia rivl Swafxei (p. 691 e)." — As 
Bitter says, Aristotle has, at Pol. 1313 a 25 ff., adopted Plato's 
view of the reason for the durability of the Spartan constitution, 
i.e. the division, and other restrictions of personal power. 

b 3. cTTct ov8' on Tail's, " any more, of course, than because he 
is a fast runner." 

b 4. With a/3€TrJs must be supplied tl/xols Bet eti/at v7r€p€Xovaa<s 
— "even virtue must not be highly honoured if unaccompanied by 
o'ox^poo'vvry." 

b 8. rhv Xoyov dKovaras : we should say, in a similar case, 
" when you have heard my reasons," but the Greek still refers to 
the logos as having an external reality and convincing power. 

c 2 and 8. These two instances may be regarded as cases of 
the virtue of c]>p6vYj(TL<s, the former being of an inferior kind to 

397 



696 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the latter. In the case of the clever artist dperi^ is excellence, 
rather than virtue. 

c 5. This argument involves the assumption that where 
SiKaLocrvvr] is absent, dSiKta must be present ; the neutral state 
as to 8iK. is put out of consideration. Here (roi<f)poarvvq is shown 
in what we should call consideration for others. The clever man 
(in any line) might easily take an unfair advantage of his neigh- 
bour, but a sense of justice makes him hold his hand. 

C 8. ovSe fM-qv ktX.. : i.e. ov8e firjv 6 (ro(^os (jiverat \iopts tov 

(T(J)(fipOV€LV. 

d 1. TTotat . . . eKacTTOTe does not explain what is meant by 
ToSe, but it explains the point of view from which at ev rats 
TToXecTL Tiiir](T€L<; are to be discussed : " There is a further question 
which arises, when we are considering the principles on which 
civic honours ought to be bestowed." — We have been told above 
that (TOicfipoarvvr) is a necessary adjunct to all virtue ; now we 
are asked, for the purposes of the lawgiver, to appraise this adjunct 
on its own account. 

d 4 ff . Ath. " Suppose a-inf^poa-vvr] to exist in a man's soul by 
itself, unaccompanied by any virtue besides ; would it have any 
claim to honour or not ? " 

Meg. " I cannot tell." 

Ath. " A very proper answer ; for really, if you said yes to 
either of my alternatives, I should think it a mistake." 

Meg. " It's just as well then that I answered as I did." 

Ath. " Quite so : the fact is that what is a (mere) adjunct to the 
things which deserve civic recognition or disapproval, is not of a 
nature to detain us ; for the purposes of our argument we may 
neglect it." 

Meg. " The adjunct you mean being crw^pocri'vry ? " 

Ath. " Yes. What is important is that whatever, of the things 
outside it, does us, with its help, the most service, that thing 
should be most highly honoured, and what comes next in usefulness 
next. In this way every quality, all down the list, would get its 
due meed of honour in its turn." As King Lear said to his youngest 
daughter, *' Let it be so : thy truth then be thy dower." But 
though (TOiffipocrvvri is to get no more praise from the public 
than Cordelia gave herself, this does not mean that it is worthless. 
We learnt in Bk. I. that eTriTT^Sev/xaTa (T(o(f>po(rvvr)<s are of great 
importance, and now we see that no virtue can be operative with- 
out it. As a personal virtue, it seems to involve a good deal of 
what we call self-respect. Notwithstanding the colourlessness which 

398 



NOTES TO BOOK III 696 d 

the words aXoyov cnyyjs seem to imply, we shall be wrong if we 
attach a merely negative significance to the word. The (nocfipiov 
xl^vxrj<s €^is (631 c 7) means more than the power of stopping at the 
right place. — At 710 a we shall see that Plato speaks of two kinds 
of (T(i)^po(Tvvr], a higher and a lower, an instinctive, and a philoso- 
phical one. 

d 9. Tvapa /xeXo? : cp. Phil. 28 b 9, I'va fxr^hev . . . i^ajxaprd- 
vovT€^ Trapa /xekos (fidey^MfxiOd tl, Ath. 687 b Happdcnos 8' 6 
^loy pdcfios, KaiTTcp Trapa jxekos VTrep Trjv eavrov T€Xvy)v rpv(f)'j(ras. 

dll. &v is omitted in (though inserted in the margin); 
Boeckh sepms to have been the first of the moderns to put it into 
the text, though it stands in A and Cod. Voss. — "We must not press 
the addition koI ari/xcat so as to make it imply that some dishonour- 
able things need this adjunct in order to be truly dishonourable, 
nor even that he has in mind any similar adjunct of dishonourable 
things ; probably he only means, " and which lack honour in its 
absence." 

697 3" 2. vo/jLodeTov . . . raiJTa SiavcfieLv : it will be re- 
membered that in the short sketch of the lawgiver's work given at 
631 d 6 ff., great stress is laid on the xf^eyetv re opOios koI cTraiveti' 
8i' avToiv vopnov (632 a 2 — cp. also 631 e 2 ri/xoiVTa opOoys . . . Kat 
aTi/xa^ovra). The great thing for the state, as for the man, is that 
it should like and dislike the right things. 

a 5 ff . Leaving to the practical lawgiver the arrangement of 
detail, we will content ourselves with dividing the objects of public 
recognition into three main classes, in descending order of merit. 

a 7. €7r€i8rj . . . cTTidvixrirai : i.e. we, as theorizers, shall not be 
content without arriving at some positive conclusion about the 
laws (therefore we will go so far as to classify them roughly, by 
merit). — As Stallb. says, the words Stare/xetv . . . rplra are 
epexegetic of rpi\y SteAetv. 

a 10. A has XeyiofxeVj L, 0, and Stobaeus kkyofi^v. 

b 1. For the conjunction of tenses in crw^eo-^at re Kat cvSaL/xo- 
vrj(T€LV Boeckh cps. Ar. Pol. 1331b 25 ttjv pikWovcrav ecrecrOai 
ttoXlv fiaKapiav Kat TroAtTcvecr^at KaAtos. 

b 2. ^cTTiv Se d/o^ws : Boeckh cps. Euthyphr. 2 d opOw^ ydp eo-rt, 
Hipparchus 227 dl dyo^ws 8' ccrrt, Grat. 388 c 5 KaAws 8' co-rtV, 
where, as here, an expression has to be supplied from the 
immediately antecedent words : " what I mean by doing this in 
the right way is ... " 

b 3. This threefold division of good things, which has been 
largely adopted by later moralists (e.g. Arist. Eth. Nic. 1098 b 13 ; 

399 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

and Cic. De off. iii. 6. 28, " quam omnia inconinioda subire, vel 
externa, vel corporis, vel etiaiu ipsiiis animi," where the contrasted 
evils are given just as at Gorg. 477 b — ovkovv xPVH-^'''^^ '^"^ 
crw/xaTOS kol ^v)(y]<s rpidv oVtwi/, Tpirras eLprfKas Trovt^piaSj 
irevLaVj vo(tov, aSiKiav ;\ is said to have been Pythagorean in origin. 
The Xeyo/xeva at b 6 is a hint that some part at least of the definition 
of the classes is not the speaker's own. 

b 4. KetcrdaL : as often, the passive of riOkvai — this time, of 
TiOevai in the sense of reckon as. 

b 6. TovTOiv €KTos /^aiVctv, " to overstep the limits imjDosed by 
this scheme " ; tovtwv here stands vaguely for something in the 
context, as at 694 d 4. 

b 7. et9 Tt/xots . . . \pr]/xaTa Tvpodyovcra : it would appear from 
this that material wealth is at least not to be honoured ; it is even 
conceivable that the author meant it to be a disgrace. At 741 e 7 
it is laid down that no citizen is to possess any money. At b 2 
above art/xtai are spoken of as well as Tipai, and the word may 
mean disgrace, though it may perhaps mean merely the absence of 
honour. (At 831a 1 Kal TOL<i pxv Ttyuas, Tol<i 8e drt/xtas ^Lavkpnov 
opOm, it clearly means positive disgrace.) In either case we might 
translate this passage: "either by promoting wealth to be a 
recipient of honour, or by raising, through honours, any member 
of the inferior classes of goods into a class above." (Jowett takes 
€19 TLfias irpodyovcra to mean putting first ; he translates, " by 
giving money the place of honour.") 

C 1. ovd' ocTLov ovT€ TTokiTLKov, " as bad in statecraft as it is in 
morality." 

C 6. Schanz recurs to the old accentuation in Uepaoiv irepi, 
taking Trepi to govern TLepaiov only, and not, as Ast says, rrjs 
TToXcreias. Hepcruyv Trept would thus = TL€p(riKrj<s. But the analogy 
of 676 c 6 TavT7]S Sr] irepl XdjSoifxev, el Swaip^eOa^ ttJ? /uL€Ta/3o\rj'i 
TYjv aiTtav, and 691 b 2 tovtov wepl tov irdOovs tyjs yevecrews, are 
in favour of taking the construction here to be -q Stda-Kexpis rrepl 
TTJs Uepcrm' TroAireta?. Cp. above on 685 c 2. 

c 7. A has €7rt €7rt tVt ; the scribe himself seems to have thought 
that the ctti had been doubled by mistake, for he put dots under 
the first, and a line under the second. (At the same time he did 
not venture to erase either.) Burnet apparently accepts this view, 
and mentions Schneider's ctti ctyj as a possible emendation of eirl 
€Ti. To this Apelt, p. 6, objects forcibly that the Persian decline 
was not steady "from year to year"; there were ups and downs. 
He prefei-s to regard A's reading as a defaced form of three words, 

400 



NOTES TO BOOK III 697 c 

and these lie suggests were eVet ciTreiv Ivt : " to put it shortly " 
comes in very well after " has led us to make a long disquisition " 
(c 5). He cps. Hdt. iii. 82 €vl Se €7ret Travra crvXXafiovra etTTftv, 
Laws 718 c ev kv\ Tvepi\a(d6vTa ccTreii/ avra otov tlvl TpoTTio, and 
811 a 9 Tt Sr) irepl tovtmv €vl Aoyw (fipd^oiv eiTroifx' av iKavov ; 
Whatever view be taken of this dark passage, ert must be wrong. 
The state of the Persian constitution is not represented as being had 
to begin with. The only proposed emendation which would keep it 
is Ast's €7r6 'Eip^ov €tl, but that gives a sense unsatisfactory on 
other grounds. We want here a general summing up of the result 
of the discussion, not a repetition of a single incident of it. I 
venture to print Apelt's suggestion in preference to any other. 

C 8. TO iXevOepov . . . TroAet : that is, they (the Persians) 
acted in direct violation of the directions given to the lawgiver 
in 693 b 3 ff. on ttoAiv kkevdkpav re etVat Set, Kal 'ifxc^pova Kat 
kavrfj <f>t\r]v. Cp. also 695 d 2 ff. (of Cyrus) ^tAiav Tropi^iav Kal 
KOLVWviav iracTLV YVkpcais. 

6.1 — 698 a 3. As Stallb. says, it is the re after orav in d 6 
which corresponds to ovd^ in d 2 ; the first part deals with the 
conduct of the potentates, the second (orav tc ktX.) with that of 
the people. — aAA,' eVcKa ttJs avrdv o.pyj]S goes with fSovX^veraL ; 
the subj. to rjyu)VTaL is ap)(^ovT€<s, supplied from -q Ttav dpxovTiDV 
fSovXi'] ; (fiiXia goes in sense with TroAet? as well as with eOvrj ; 
the re after e)(^pa)s is " and in consequence." — For /zto-ovvTes 
fXLcrovvTai cp. Rep. 417 b fXL(TovvT€<i Se 6^ Kat yLtto-ov/xevot, and 
below 763 a 5 Sta/covovi'Tes re Kat SiaKovovfxevoL, and Soph. Aj. 
1134 with Lobeck's note. (I see no reason to follow Schanz in 
making a lacuna after apxy^, and rejecting the forcible fxicrovvTai. 
At most I would put a ( — ) after dpxrj'S and another after KaTa<fi6. 
to mark the looseness of the construction. After /xio-ovvre? there 
is an erasure in A of something (? orav), and the last eight letters 
of fjLLo-ovvTaL orav extend beyond the line into the margin. This 
looks as if A at first omitted /xto-ovvrat — a natural blunder. 
Hug would excise from Trvpl to yato-ovvTe?.) — We may translate : 
" Patriotism has vanished. On the one hand the mind of the 
potentates does not think of the good of their subjects and the 
people, but only of the establishment of their own authority, so 
that, if they imagine it will do themselves the least good, when 
('(.casion occurs, they overturn and burn with fire cities and tribes 
of friendly people, and, in consequence, hate and are hated with a 
deadly and pitiless hatred. On the other hand, when they come 
to want the common people to fight in their defence, they find 

VOL. I 401 2 D 



697 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

there is no sort of union among them, and no zeal to make them 
risk their persons in battle. Masters of countless millions, they 
cannot command a single soldier. They hire outsiders, as if they 
had no subjects of their own, and actually fancy that strangers 
and hirelings will be their salvation. Besides all this, there is 
a folly which they cannot avoid, for they proclaim by their 
actions on each occasion that whatever counts in the state as 
honourable and precious is as nothing in comparison with gold 
and silver." 

698 a 9. The older MSS. all have irepl tyjv Trj<s 'ATTLKrjs av 
TToAireta?, and so Burnet prints it. If Plato wrote this he must 
have intended to put in ekevOepiav, but, as he puts in ikevOepia 
in another construction, it seems the best thing to omit the 
rrjv. Late MSS. and all edd. but Burnet alter TroAtretas to 
TToAtretav, 

a 10. Though at a 5 f . rot Tvept ye Xlepcrtuv seems to be the 
subject of TcAos e^^erco, and <j)s ovk opdojs StoiKetrat to be 
epexegetic of rd, it seems better here to take SLe^eXOetv (" to set 
forth ") as governing the following w? clause directly, and to take 
ra irepl 'ATTLKrj<s 7roA6T€ias as adverbial — " with respect to the 
Athenian constitution." 

b 1. Here we have two prepositional phrases depending on 
nouns : aTro Trao-wv ap^^wi^ on eXevdepia, and vcf> erepMv on 
dpX^'^' In I'lie latter case, as Stallb. says, a simple gen. would 
have left it doubtful whether it was subjective or objective ; the 
expression used leaves no doubt that government hy, not 
government 0/, is meant. The quasi-compound adjective fxcrpov 
€)(^ov(Tr]<i adds to the effect of complexity given by the sentence. 
(Ast ingeniously, but wrongly, proposed to read vfierepas for v(f) 

€T€p(OV.) 

b 3. For the dat. governed by the verbal noun iirlOea-Ls cp. 
on 633 c 2. 

b 5. eK TLjjL-qfjidTcov . . . T€TTdp(i)v : we must not press this 
CK to mean that officials of any kind might come from any of the 
four classes of Solon's timocracy. Members of the fourth class were 
members of the electing assembly, but might not be elected them- jj 
selves to any office, while some high offices were confined to 
members of the highest class. €k then means " on a basis of," and, 
to those who knew, the mention of dp^ai in this connexion would 
convey the notion that in some way certain offices were confined 
to certain classes ; cp. Rep. 553 a Jk Tt/xr^/xarwv €\ov(ra rov^ 
dp)(^ovTa^. — Kal SecnroTLS evrjv rts alScos : a practical expression, 

402 



NOTES TO BOOK III 698 b 

" besides, we had a conscience ; we were still the thralls of shame." 
(" Reverence still held sway in our hearts.") 

b 8. y€vo/xei/oi/ : the hugeness is spoken of as making itself 
apparent on sea and land. — ajropov, " helpless " ; a case of the 
transference of a characteristic proper to a person to something in 
connexion with that person. So at 873 c an ala-xvvq is spoken of 
as oLTTopo's Kal a^Los ; so we talk of " hopeless despondency," or a 
''hopeless malady." Here, and below 699 b 4, desperate will trans- 
late it. Some inferior MSS. have aTreipov. (Ast is not far wrong, 
pace Stallbaum, in explaining it to mean invincible.) 

C 1 f . The greatness of the fear made the people humble, and 
so law-abiding, and dependent on the wisdom of their rulers, 
besides cementing the ties of a common citizenship. 

C 3. (T(fi68pa (fnXla : cp. above 639 b (r<f>68pa yvvaLKOJVj 791 c 5 
Travrekios TratSwv, Rep. 434 c fxaXicrra KaKOvpyia, and Rep. 564 a 
ayav SovXeiav. Schanz follows Aid. in reading the adj. o-cf)o8pd. 

d 1. p^vptdcTi crv^^vai? : rather a dat. of effective accompaniment 
than a dat. of the instrument; "at the head of his countless 
myriads," 

d 4. For dpa, "actually," following yap cp. Prot. 315 c 8 
€7re8///>tet yap dpa Kal IIpdStKos o Keto?. (It is the same dpa 
which an old-fashioned Homeric scholar is said to have insisted 
on translating as " God help them ! " in the phrase T/awe? pd ; a 
parenthetic " bless us ! " though too conversational, would render 
it here.) — crayrjvivcraLev : Goodwin, M. and T. §675, "an indirect 
quotation with ort or ws and the opt. is sometimes followed by an 
independent opt. (generally introduced by ya/a), which continues 
the quotation as if it were itself dependent on the on or ws." 
Cp. Phil. 58 b; at Phaedo 96 b an opt. is so used when giving 
somebody else's opinion, though no ort or ws clause has gone 
before it. 

d 5. Hermann would read os for the simple article, and thus 
remove the asyndeton. 

d 6. eiVe Kal ottyj d(f)iK€To : a euphemism for etVe xpevSi^'s. 

e 1* ovSeis : Hdt. (vi. 108) says the Plataeans joined the Ath. 
in full force. 

e 2. Cp. above 692 d 6. 

e 3. ov yap Lo-piv X^yop^^vov : apparently " for I am not aware 
that the cause is stated." 

e 4. 8' ovv, " be that as it may," " for whatever reason." — As at 
707 c 2 Schanz rejects the ei' before MapaOiovi. 

e 5. I think Aeyo/xei/at goes with dTreiXai as well as with 

403 



698 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

TrapacTKevaL ; "reports kept reaching us of immense preparations and 
never-ceasing threats on the part of the great king." 

e 7. veos (Se) Koi acfioSpos 6 {)os avrov, " his son, with all the 
fire of youth " ; the adjs, are predicative. 

699^^* oi!t€ yap fSorjOija-eLV avTots ovScva : this ovt€ corre- 
sponds to the Kttfc before Kara OdXarrav in b 1. He has just said 
the Athenians saw no way of avoiding destruction, whether they 
stayed on land, or took to the sea. Then he enlarges on these two 
points : (1) if they stood their ground they would get no help, and 
(2) if they tried to sail away they would be intercepted. There is 
a break in the construction after ovScva : fiefxvrj/xivoL goes back to 
the ryyrycravTo, to which, in sense, (^or^Orjoreiv is subordinate. 
Schanz and Burnet mark this by parenthesis marks before 
fjiefxvrjfMevoL and after yrjv in b 1. 

b 1. TO ye Kara yrjv : the ye gives the effect of "so much for 
their chances by land." 

b 4. aiTopov, " desperate " ; cp. above 698 b 8. 

b 5. ws e^ (XTropiov koi t6t€ ec^atvero yei'eo-^at to vtKrjcrai /xa^o- 
fjLkvov<i, " and remembered how desperate the chances of success in 
the field had looked then " ; e<^atVeTo, in quasi-reported speech, 
refers to a time previous to that of crvv€v6ovv, and must therefore 
be rendered in English by a pluperfect. — e^ drr. . . . e<^. yev. : lit. 
"how victory in fight had seemed to emerge from a hopeless state 
of things " ; i.e. e^ airopiav is merely a variety of expression for 

(XTTOpOV. 

b 6. eTTt Se Trjs eXTTiSos oxovfxevot TavrrjS : " opfxeiv sive oxetcrdaL 
€7rt dyKvpas dicunt Graeci, ut in notissima Demosthenis sententia 
ovK eTTt TrJ? avrrj'i opfxel Tots TroAAots, ubi subaudiendum dyKvpas 
monet Harpocration. Et cum spes ajDtissime j)er ancoram 
significetur, facillima translatione dicunt, €7r' eATrtSos d;^eio-^ai, 
unde in proverbium abiit." Porson on Orest. 68, who cites Ar. 
Eq. 1244 and this passage, and Plut. No7i posse suad. ch. 26. 6 
(Wyttenb. p. 505 e) Katrot V€(o<s jxkv iKTzecroiv eTrt/^aT?;? StaXydeta-i^s 
<e7r'> eATTiSos ox^trai Ttvos, o)s yj) irpocre^iov to o-a»/xa /cai 
8Lavri^6fX€vo<i. Neil on Eq. 1244 agrees with Casaubon that in 
the phrase Itt' cXttlSos ox^la-Oai the metaphor is of a man on a 
raft, and he cj^s. Phaedo 85 d eirl rovrov o;(ov/xevos tocnrep eVt 
o-xeSta?. Certainly Plutarch did not use the metaphor with the 
consciousness of its coming from the use of an anchor ; a ship- 
wrecked swimmer would not fare any better for being anchored. 
Still I can hardly believe Porson to have been wrong in such a 
matter. 

404 



NOTES TO BOOK III 699 C 

C 2 f . The 110ms. 6 (f>6l3o<s 6 rrap^v . . . 6 re . . . ycyovw? are 
in explanatory apposition to ravra irdvTa. Both kinds of fear 
helped to unite the populace. F.H.D. suggests that ov . . . 
€K€KTr)VTo is a " gloss," SovXevovTe^ being taken from the foil. Sovke- 
v€Lv. Badham rejects the words €k twi/ vofMiov tu)v. They involve 
a tautology, but it is difficult to see who could have inserted them. 
An author does sometimes say the same thing twice over, in slightly 
different language, if he wants to lay special stress on the idea 
conveyed. Certainly there is no idea in the Laws to which Plato 
attaches such importance as to this, i.e. that loyalty to good laws 
begets a good character. It was this loyalty, he says, to the laws 
and institutions of a better time that made the Athenians of that 
day what they were. 

C 5. Cp. 647 a 8 f . vofModeT-q^ . . . tovtov tov <ji6f3ov ev TLfirj 
/ji€yL(TTr) a-i/Sci. — Cp. the scriptural use of the word fear, e.g. 
" the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." 

C 6. 17s 6 SeiXos iXivOepos kol a^o/?os * ov ei Tore firj Seos 
iXafSev, ovK av Trore crvveXOiov rjfxvvaTO, " from which (kind of fear) 
the timorous man is (by nature) free and immune ; and yet, had it 
not been for his seizure by a fear on that occasion, the timorous 
man would never have joined the army, and repelled the foe." 
For a^o/i?os with a cognate gen. cp. 647 c 3 a<^o(^ov . . . (f>6^u)v 
TToAAwv TLVMV. — OV '. the rel. clause has here, I think, an 
adversative force. — 8eos eXa^ev : used with the consciousness that 
it was an epic phrase (cp. the Hom. Seos etXev), and, moreover, 
that Seos had a literary connexion with alSm. Cp. 657 
Lo^x^ yap atSo)? Kal Seos, the verse from the Gypria quoted at 
Euthyphro 12 b 1 iVa yap Seos €vOa Kal alSio's, and Soph. Aj. 1073— 
1083, the passage which begins ov yap ttot' ovt av ev ttoXcl vofxoi 
KttAco? (^kpoLVT av 'ivda p.rj KadecTTrjKrj Sios, and associates Seos with 
al(Txvvr}. — The idea of the fight with fear — which here results in 
the mastering of the first kind of fear by the second — has occurred 
above at 647 c 10 rfj p-ev SetAt^ rfj ev avru) Trpoa-p.axopxvov Kal 
VLKwvTa avTYjv Set rcAeov ovru) yiyviadai tt/sos dvSpetav. — After a 
careful consideration of the ten or more emendations proposed in 
various parts of this passage, I have come to the conclusion that 
they all present difficulties at least as great as those in the text ; 
and so, I am glad to see, has O. Apelt (j). 6) ; only he accepts 
Schanz's statement that A has ^ 6 SetAos, and he proposes to read 
y 6 SetXos eA. kol d<f>. But Burnet, who comes after Schanz, 
assures us that A, like all the other MSS., reads rj<5. (The chief 
emendations are : i/s 6 SotiAo? Heindorf and Ast, 1^5 6 8yjp,o<s Herni., 

405 



699 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

<T0> roT€ Heind., Sv^/xos for 8eos Badham, /x/jSeU for /ji-q 6eos 
Stallb., tJ 6 S'^/xos Schaiiz, o for ov Ritter ; Schmidt would reject 
Kttt acfio^os and (rvveXdiov.) 

d 2. rjixiov cKacTTos : if Srjfxos had been the true reading at 
either place above, it would not have been necessary to alter the 
subject to rjfjLiov eKaaros here. 

d 3-e 6. Meg. " What you say is not only very true, but there 
is also a special fitness in its being said by you as an Athenian." 
Ath. " There is a sj)ecial fitness about my words, Megillus ; I 
mean that it is right to tell that story to you, born as you are to 
an inheritance in your ancestors' character. Moreover, I want you 
and Cleinias to consider what my story has to do with law- 
making" (lit. "if I am saying what has in any degree" — tl — "an 
appropriateness to voixoOecria "). " For my disquisition is not made 
for the story's sake, but for the reason I mention " (i.e. to help us 
to understand the right principles of vofxoOecria). "It is interest- 
ing : (lit. "just look !'^) just as, in a way, our fate was the same as 
that of the Persians, though they reduced the j)opulace to absolute 
slavery, and we, on the other hand, drove our masses towards 
absolute freedom, so our discourse of a little time back turns out 
in a way very useful (towards deciding) how and what ought to be 
said next." 

d 6. Ast would read kolv<j)Vov Srj twv Trarptuiv yeyovora <f>v(T€L. 
He was partly led to this by the fact that Trarpcoiov (for Trarkpinv) 
was (apparently) the only MS. reading he knew. 

d 8. H. Steph. alters tl to to., Schanz rejects it ; Wagner reads 
TrpocrrJKov for Trpoa-rjKovra — all quite unnecessary changes. 

el. Most interpreters take ov Aeyw evcKa to mean "with a 
view to the object of our discussion." It seems more natural to 
take (tovtov) o Aeyw to mean " what I mentioned just now." 

e 2. TavTov TrdOos : i.e. national deterioration and decay. — 
The plpf. (Tv/j.fS€/3i]K€L — in which Schanz may well be right in 
introducing the augment — does not imply that the process of 
deterioration took place at Athens sooner than in Persia ; it marks 
the time of the events as previous to that of the verb eiprjjxkvoi eia-t. 

e 3. For A's ayovcTL, L and have ayayova-i. 

e 5. The chief difficulty in this passage is in the apjjarent 
inadequacy of KaAws elprjjjievoL as an introduction to the sub- 
ordinate TTcu? Acyw/xev. All through the paragraph the idea of 
fitness and correspondence has been prominent : this may incline us 
to read into KaAw? the notion ^^ aptly " i.e., in this case, "so as to 
give an indication." (Ficinus puts in " demonstrant") Tliis is 

406 



NOTES TO BOOK III 699 e 

better than, with Schanz, to suppose a lacuna after Tovvrevdev (to 
which he affixes a mark of interrogation, having previously made 
ov Aeyw cVeKtt depend on opare, and accepted Badham's ov yoip ; 
for yap before eTreiSr/). — Hug proposed 7} yap ; Ritter rt yap ; Ast 
at one time was for rejecting Trw? . . . rovvTivd^v ; Wagner sus- 
pected 01 irpoy. . . . €lp7Jp.€V0L. 

700 a 4. Tti/wv Kvpio<s: as we might say, "master of the 
situation " ; tlv(dv is neater. — The rpoTrov rtva apologizes for the 
apparent contradiction in eKwi/ k^ovXev(T€. (Some take rtvwv to 
be masc, and supply vopMv.) 

a 7. TT^pl TYjv /xovcTLK^v : cp. above on 685 c 2. The danger 
of innovations in music is described in much the same way at Rep. 
424 b cd. — TT/owTov : he is here answering the question "what laws 
have you in your mind ? " not " what laws were they slaves to ? " so 
that TrpojTov gives the logical and not the temporal order, " in the 
first place." Though the so-called slavery did not begin with 
the music, the first indication of the lawless temperament was, he 
says, visible in this domain. How significant and how important 
a tendency to lawlessness in music is, can be seen by readers of 
Book II. and of the above-cited passage of the Republic^ where 
Plato emphasizes its importance as a main element in the influences 
formative of character and disposition. But there was more in it 
than that, as we shall see at 701 a : along with and as the result 
of the presumption of the uneducated mob to disregard the 
established rules and criteria of musical art, the mob grew conceited^ 
and this conceit, politically speaking, poisoned tluir freedom^ and 
made democracy dangerous. Men no longer had a proper respect 
for the judgement of their superiors. 

a9-c7. 8Lr)prjp.€vrj . . . lytyvero, "our music in those days 
was divided into definite kinds and styles ; one kind of song was 
used to address the gods, and was called vfivoL ; as a counterpart 
to this came a different kind of song, which might well have been 
called dpyjvoL] of -a third kind were Tratwves; still another — so-called, 
I take it, because describing the birth of Dionysus — was named 
St^v/aa/i^o?. And they used this very word vo/xot to describe a 
fifth kind : these they further distinguished as KtOapoySiKOL (for 
the lyre). Now these distinctions of kind, and others like them, 
were binding ; you could not set any song to any kind of tune 
which did not belong to it. Moreover the authority to take 
cognizance of these rules, to pronounce judgement in accordance 
with them, and punish those who offended against them, was not 
the catcall, or the discordant outcries of the gallery, as it is now, 

407 



700 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

nor tlie clapping of hands either, to signify applause. No : the 
educated part of the audience had made it a rule, as far as they 
were concerned, to listen in silence throughout a performance, 
and there was the reminder of the official's rod to keep order 
among the children and flunkeys (their attendants) and the mass 
of the populace." 

b 1. etSr) and (rxqiiara here seem used in the same sense as 
€t5os and rpoiroi at Rep. 424 c etSos yap Kaivov fxov(TLKri<i 
[xcTaf^aWeiv ivXaf^r^rkov cos iv oA^ Kiv^vvevovra' ovSafJLOv yap 
KLvovvraL fiovcrtKrjs rpoTzoi aviv TroAtrtKwy vopnov /xeyiVrwv. 

b 2. Of the two readings rovro) A and tovto L and 0, the 
former is manifestly the correct one. — On the other hand I think 
a corrector of was right in changing the akXo after i^rjv into 
aAAo) at b V. The original scribe was misled by familiarity with 
the phrase aAAo eis aAAo "indiscriminately." If A L and — 
and oAa rot avrcypacfia, ace. to the scribe of — are right, wa 
must suppose Plato to have been guilty of a vulgar error. (So 
also in the case of Aristotle, De part. anim. 663 b 31.) 

b 3. ay €KdX€<T€v and perhaps /xaAto-ra imply that the term 
OprjvoL, as thus applied, did not date from these early times. 

b 5. The ot/xat possibly does not imply doubt in the speaker's 
mind as to the subject, but as to the reason for the name 
Stdvpafif^o'^. The apposition is a strange one, anyhow. (Can 
y€V€(TL<; possibly be used in the sense of "a production '' — "a 
Dionysiac product " ?) — vofxovs : the so-called Nonies must have 
been, as Wagner and Apelt say, something like the German 
Chorale, and, from their solemn character were necessarily accom- 
panied by the lyre. — This use of the term law in music seems to 
Plato, in a way, to clinch his argument ; cp. below 722 e 1 and 
799 e 10 if., Pint. De mus. 1133 be— The applicability of words 
denoting fixed standards or rules to music is evident in many 
languages. E.g. our canon (Gr. Kavu>v) denotes a composition 
written strictly according to rule. (Grove's Diet, of Music, s.v. 
canon.) It is amusing to read at Arist. Probl. 19. 28 (919 b 38) 
that the vofxoL which were sung were so called because, in illiterate 
ages and peoples, actual laws were sung — like versified Latin 
gender rules. 

b 6. ip8r)v ws TLva ere/aav, " regarding them " (i.e. the Nomes) 
" as a special kind of song " ; merely a variety of the previous 
w8v]S €T€pov etSos. (Hitter pronounces ws, and Apelt erepav, as 
inexplicable, and the latter proposes to read Upav for krkpav.) 

b 7. See above on b 2. 

408 



NOTES TO BOOK III 

C 1. TovTiiiv depends on Kvpo<i ; Ast well compares a similar 
gen. and infin. with Kvptos at Dem. Adv. Aristocr. 689 (sub fin.) 
To> Kvptco Tiov (fiopiov y€vo/x€vio Ttt^at. — I have thought it well to 
put a comma after rovTOiv. For the loosely connected epexegetic 
infins. cp. below 790 c 3, Rep. 416 a 6 (with Adam's note), 443 b 8, 
Gorg. 513 e (with Thompson's note), Tim. 33 c 4, Phaedr. 242 b. 

C 5. Toi? fji€v yeyovocTL irepl TraiSevcnv : a vague phrase for 
what we should call " the cultured classes " — " those who moved 
in educated circles." — yeyovevai 7re/3t = the ha.t. versari in ; for a 
similar phrase cp. Phil. 33 c 5 kol /JLrjv to ye erepov etSos twv 
rjSoviJjv o Tr^<s \pv)(rj<; avrrjs k<j>ap.€.v civai Sea p.viqix7]<i irav €(ttl 
yeyovds, so Theag. 130 b St' aTT€\d(.La<s kyey ovei. (Ast and others 
take the words to mean the body of teachers and educational officials 
— " those engaged in education.") — For TraiSevcrLS in the sense of 
culture cp. Prat. 349 a 3 TratSevcrews Kal dperrjs StSdaKaXov, Tim. 
53 c 2 €7r€t />t€T€^€T€ TO)V KaTot TraiSevcTiv oSiov. 

c 6. avTots: emphatic, "with their own ears." Riddell however, 
Digest %222j takes it as a mere "pronominal resumption." — 7raio-6 
. . . ox Aw: cp. i^e^. 397 d 7. 

d 1. ravr' : adverbial, "in these respects"; it goes with 
apxecrOai. — ovtio TeTayfxevws, " SO strictly." (If any alteration 
of the text is to be proposed, I should venture to suggest tot' 
for ravr'.) 

d4. (jiixreL . . . rjSovrjs, "ignorant, in spite of all their 
poetical gifts, of what is right and proper in the Muses' domain, 
frenzied victims of an unhappy itch for pleasure." This censure 
applies to both words and tune, Aristoxenus, as quoted by 
Athenaeus (xiv. 632 b), echoes it thus : Kal rd Oearpa iK/Se/Sap- 
f3dp(i)TaL Kal €ts fxeyakrjv SiaifiOopdv TrpoeX-qXvOev r^ TrdvSrjfxo^ 
avrri p.ovdiK'q. See also the quotation from the same author 
made by Flut, De mus. 1142b, where Telesias of Thebes is said 
to have forsaken the old school of Pindar and others for that of 
Philoxenus and Timotheus, with disastrous effects. 

d 6. KepavvvvTis ktX. : cp. Flut. De mus. 1133 b ov yap i^rjv to 
TraAatov ovru) TroielcrBai to,? KLOapioStas ws vvv, ovSe /xera^jiepeLv rds 
dpp.ovia<i kol tov<s pvOfiov's. 

e 1. p.ovorLKrj<s . . . opOoTrjra, " without intending it, they 
were guilty of so far slandering their art as to assert, in their 
folly, that there was no such thing as right or wrong in music : 
the one proper criterion was the pleasure of the hearer, be he 
gentle or simple." 

e 3. €LT€ jSeATtwv €iT€ ^upiov dv €17; Tis : the syntax is 

409 



700 c 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

peculiar ; av citj seems to be the reported -speech form of the 
iterative av •^v :• — 6 Kpivoiv av '^v ^eXriiov tl<s, " the arbiter would 
be (on occasion) a man of some consideration " ; tliis, quoted from 
somebody else's mouth, might be (on) or (et) f3e\TL0)v tls etrf av 6 
KptviDV. It is not parallel to the eiTrep . . . TreLOoLfxrjv av at 
Prot. 329 b (which is itself not free from suspicion), for that is in 
direct speech, and the main verb is a present (Goodwin, M. and T. 
§ 506). 

e 4. It is clear from the context that Tvotr^rai and Troti^/xaTa 
are here used of musical composers and compositions in the first 
place, though the same artist " sets " (iTriAeyet), to the hetero- 
geneous musical medley, words of an equally extravagant kind 
(tolovtovs). 

e 5. Trapavofxtav : at the same time that these lawless poets 
gave the mob (ol ttoXXol) an unfounded conceit in their own 
judgement, they discredited the principles on which alone a true 
judgement could be passed. 

701 a 3. OearpoKparia : as we might say, " Tom, Dick, and 
Harry usurped the critic's chair." C]3. Hamlet in. ii. 26 "the 
censure of the which one " (i.e. " the judicious ") " must in your 
allowance o'erweigh a whole theatre of others." — " S17 et s.v. A^ : 
av A," Burnet. 

a 3-a 7. " For even though a democracy had arisen, if confined 
to music (ev avrfj jjlovov), and to properly educated men, it would 
have done no great harm ; but, as it was, it did not stop at 
music, and the notion that every man was an authority on every 
subject, and was above all rules, this was the notion which got 
the upper hand among us, and Education had to give way 
to it." — For this sense of crvvecfiea-TreTO cp. 690 b 8 f . €7re(rdaL 
pAV Tov dv€7rL(TTrjp.ova . . . rov Se <f>povovvra rjyeia-Oat re /cat 
ap)(^€tv. 

a 4. " avTT; L (ut vid.) : kavrfj A 0," Burnet. — Again at a 5 
A and have v/xtv, a manifest error for 17/xiv, but no good MS. 
has the latter, and some omit the pronoun altogether. 

a 7. a(fio/3oi : without the right kind of fear, that is, of which 
we heard so much at the end of Bk. I. Pope expresses a good 
deal of the same idea when he says " For fools rush in where 
Angels fear to tread." 

a 8. TO yap kt\., " for what is it but shocking impudence, 
when a man disregards the opinion of his betters out of a self- 
conceit that is begotten of liberty grown over-bold ? " 

b 2. aTTOTCTo\p.rip.kvy]^ : Ast cps. Plut. Galba 1064 (ch. 25) 

410 



NOTES TO BOOK III 701 b 

Sta TTjv oXcyoTrjTa twv aTTOTCToA^T^/xei'cuj/ (of men engaged in a 
desperate venture). 

b 6. kiroixkvrj ravTrj cf>€vy€iv : for iTTOjxkviq Tavrrf rj iXevOepia 
Tov (fievyeiv ; a remarkable instance of the power of leaving out 
words recently uttered in a parallel construction. 

b 7. L (and two minor MSS.) have vov6kri)(TLv here for the 
vo/jLoBeTrjcTLv of the rest. Badhani restored vovdiTrjo-tv as a 
conjecture. (The same restoration may probably be made at 
Plutarch, Galha^ ch. 18, where we read eSoKct yap ovk avros 
aiTocrrepelv fxovos dAAa vofxoOeretv Kai SiSdcTKCLV tov<s fxeO avTov 

aVTOKpOLTOpaS.) 

b 8 f . €yy V9 TOV xeAovs ovctlv, and irpos avTw -qSr) tw reAet are 
metaphors from the stadium. Freedom is running a race to 
perdition, and the two stages described are the semi-jfinal, and the 
final. 

c 1 flf. irpos . . . KttKwy, " in their final stage they are con- 
temners of oaths, and pledges and of everything sacred and divine, 
and they present (to the world) the spectacle of the Titanic nature 
of which the old stories tell us — how they had to return to their 
old quarters, and pass a cruel time of unending woe." — Or, if 
€7r€t €7rt be read, " for they had to return etc." (H. Steph. puts 
in io(TT€ before cttc ; Ast said loare should be supplied in thought ; 
Stallb. said it was not needed at all ; Schanz writes d<^6Ko/x€vo69, 
but all, apparently, take the words to refer to the degenerate 
" liberals." The only possible explanation of the 7rdX.Lv (in that 
case) that occurs to me is to suppose Plato to share the view 
expressed by Dio Chrys. xxx. p. 550 ort tov rwr Ttrdvwv 
ai'/xaros icrfiev T^/x€t§ ctTravTe? ot dvdpoiiroi (whence the enmity of 
Heaven).) — rr]v Xeyo/xkvrjv is "as related in the old stories," and I 
believe ctti to, avra . . . KaKiov to refer to the Titans, and to 
depend on something to be supplied in thought from X^yojxkvqv. 
In the form of the story here referred to the Titans were punished 
for some offence by being sent to Tartarus. They escaped, fought 
with the Olympian Gods {their superiors), were beaten, and sent 
back to Tartarus (or worse), to stay. It is a state of eternal 
punishment like this to which those who abuse their liberty are 
condemned. koI fiL/jLovfxevois then means, by implication, " and 
giving a representation of their fate." (Possibly an cTrei has been 
lost befoi-e ctti ; cf. Prot. 353 a 2.) 

C 3. €. KOI fjLLixovfjikvoLS '. these datives like ovcrtv go with 
ytyvoLT av, but would sound like absolute datives.' 

C 6. €Kd(TTOT€ dvaXafx^dveiv = " constantly pull up." 

411 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 7. KeKTT^fxkvov and (fiepo/jLevov agree with tlie subject to 
dvaXafji/Sdveiv, i.e. " oneself," and the a-To/xa is one's own mouth 
which speaks the Xoyos (Stallb. takes d^. to (tt. to be "unbridled in 
mouth" and to refer to the Aoyov) — with a glance at the previous 
metaphor — , then directly, the Aoyos itself is pictured again as a 
runaway horse. Cp. Prot. 338 a kc^elvai koI \aXd(Tai ras rjvias 
TOLS Xoyois, Eur. Bacch. 385 d\aX.ivu}v crroixdruiv dvofxov t dcfjpo- 
(Tvva<i TO TcAos Svcrrvxta, Aristoph. Ban. 838 dxdXivov a-rofxa ; so 
we talk of " letting one's tongue run away with one." 

d 1. diro TLVos ovov Trecretv : probably no more than a 
picturesque and familiar expression for "get a fall." Some 
commentators take the proverb to imply clumsiness^ others blindness 
to one^s ovm advantages (cf. Ar. Nub. 1274). A L and have vou, 
0^ ovov. The mistake was probably not accidental, but due to a 
misunderstanding of some grammarian's note to the effect that 
often — e.g. in the passage from the Clouds — dir' ovov was meant to 
be heard as aTro vov. 

d 2. X'^P'-^ €V€Ka : a clear case of conflation. I should follow 
Vat. 177, Schanz, and others in rejecting eVcKa. Boeckh p. 197 
says : " Illud autem cognovi, numquam iungi duas praepositiones 
CK 7rapaXXy]Xov, nisi quarum alterutra possit absque casu scribi, 
ita ut adverbii teneat locum." (The passages cited by Stallb. in 
defence of the text admit either of special explanation, or of a 
likely emendation.) 

d7. iXe^a/xev : 693 b 3. Of the three objects, the first two 
correspond accurately enough to the Liberie and Fraternite of the 
early French Rej)ublicans ; but the mind in Plato's state is shown 
chiefly in the renouncement on the part of the multitude of any 
claim to intellectual Egalite. See esj^ecially 689 b 2 f., where the 
absence of the disposition to obey the wise is called dvota, 
693 c and Rep. 431 d ft'. 

e 1. rovTiiiv €V€Ka Si], " it is to secure these objects that, etc." 
— The ace. pi. TroAtreta? has, in the place of the 8vo or Slttus 
which we should expect, rrjv re S. koX r-qv iX. in semi-agreement 
with it. Ficinus translates " duas gubernationum species," and 
somewhat so, to preserve the order and emphasis, must we trans- 
late in English. But this does not prove that Boeckh (p. 197) is 
right in holding that Plato must have written 8vo eiSy] TroAtreias. 
There is no need, indeed, of the passages he quotes (e.g. below 735 a 5) 
to prove that such words would be correct and natural Greek. 
But no one has a right to forbid such a construction as that in 
the text. There is nothing more illogical in it than in, e.g., tov 

412 



NOTES TO BOOK III 701 e 

T€ 6^€os 0L/j.a KOL fSap€o^ (Tvy K€pavvv[xkv(j)v at 665 a 1 ; still closer 
parallels are ^ai^/xa^ovre? aAAo? aAAw 'iXeyov {Symp. 220 c 6), and 
Kat at (xAAat Tracrat ovtids to avrrjs eKd(rrr] cpyov ipyd^eraL {Rep. 
346 d 5). 

e 3-8. Xaf^ovTes ktA. : €KaT€pas is gen. sing. ; rwv fiev is " in 
the case of the Persians," tmv Se " in the case of the Athenians."^ — ■ 
XafSovre^ is subordinate to KareiSopev ; " we perceived that, when 
we found " or " got " (in either the one or the other, etc.) ; totc 
resumes the participial clause. — eAev^epta^'etv is used, as at Ar. 
Pol. 1314a8, of a self-assertive, pushing sense of freedom. — 
Ritter appositely compares Ep. viii. 354 e SovXeia yap Kat eXevdepta 
v7r€pf3dXXov(Ta fxkv CKarepa irdyKaKov, €/x/>i€Tpo5 Se ov(ra iravdyaOov, 
and reminds us how near the two passages come to the Aristotelian 
doctrine of the right mean. 

e 6. dyay6vT(ov (so L, and the margin of A) is intrans. ; 
" when they marched, moved, pushed on " — a military term. A^ 
and the margin of have dyaOov twv, from which Schanz con- 
jectures the original reading to have been dyav lovrojv. Many 
other alterations have been proposed of this passage, as may be 
seen from Schanz's critical note. 

e 7. ovre Tot? ovT€ rots: cp. 721 b 3 \p-qfjba(ri p.\v rocrots Kat 
TO(rots, TQ Kat Ty Se art/Ata, Rep. 546 c la-ofXT^Kt] pAv rfj, Xen. Rep. 
Ath. 2. 8 rovro /xev Ik rr}?, tovto Se €k rr)?, Theaet. 167 e iv 
p.€v Tw . . . 61/ Se Tw. The pure demonstrative use of the article 
is unusual outside Homer and the tragedians (e.g. Aesch. Suppl. 
439 ry roiaLV t] rots iroXepLOV aipeaBaL p.kyav). 

702 a 2. avTwi/ : its position, and the y' both help to make 
this word emphatic ; " and that's the reason why." 

a 6. Aoyoi;?, zeugma ; we must supply from Weaa-dp^eda a 
verb to fit it. 

a 8. TToAts . . . Kat tSta : in the first two books we were 
dealing with the latter subject — i.e. the way laws can help to 
make a good man — and in the tiiird book with the former — the 
right way to ordain the constitution of a state. The mention of 
this subject is a dramatic introduction to Cleinias's subsequent 
communication. The following question clinches the matter ; for 
the Ath. asks if there is any test to be applied which would gauge 
the success of their attempts, and the soundness of their theories. 

b 4. Kara Tv^qv rtvd : in the same sense Kara deov is used at 
682 e 10 and at Euthyd. 272 el Kara deov ydp riva €rv\ov 
Kad-qp-evo^ €VTavOa ; so at b 7 Kara TLva av Kaipov. 

C 2. Kat irpos (adv.) : cp. Laws 746 d 8 Kat Trpos ye ra? ttoAc- 

413 



702 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

/xtKas Ta^€i9, Gorg. 469 b 1 Kal iXeetvov ye Trpos, 513 b 6 Kal v. fx. 
A. Tw TLvpiXdfXTvovs yc Trpos, Rep. 328 a 6 Kat Trpos ye Travvvx^tSa 
TTOirjO'ovo'LV, 466 e Kat Trpos ye a^oixn Tuiv TratStuy ets tov TroXefxov 
ocroL aSpoi^ 559 a 2 Kat 7r/3os oi'Sei/ aya^ov' ivovarai SpukrcVj Euthyd. 
294 a Kat crv ye tt/do?, Men. 90 e Kat a/xa^ia ye 7r/)09, Prot. 321 d 
Trpos Se Kat at Atos <f>vXaKaL <f)0 /Sepal '^crav, Soph. 234 a </>^/xi, Kat 
Trpos ye BaXarrrjS, Menex. 249 e Kat Trpos ye aXXoyv (-ots) ttoAAwv 
(-ots) X^P''^ ^X^' I^ '^^'^^l ^^ ^^^^ ^^^^t only tliree of these passages 
have no ye. In other authors the ye is left out as often as not. 

c 8. €/xoL re Kat vp^tv : the advantage to the three speculators 
would be — ultimately perhaps — the opportunity of putting their 
views to the test of experience (see Timaeus 19 c), but, at all 
events, immediately the opportunity of seeing the general prin- 
ciples, above arrived at, applied to concrete instances, and embodied 
in actual laws. In either case they would be putting their 
theories to the test. 

d 1. eK TOiv etpr]p.ev(DV : possibly this refers only to the con- 
versation which had already taken place — possibly to the whole 
of the conversation on the subject on which they were then 
engaged. The former explanation suits the context better, but 
the word eKXe^avres is in favour of the latter. — rw Aoyw, "in 
imagination," 

d2. oiov "imagining ourselves to be." 

d 3. eTTia-Kexj/is, inspections examination^ as at 849 a, rather than 
inquiry s as at Re'p. 456 c ; " we shall be able to look at what we 
want " — i.e. a test of their theories. 

d 6. ov TToAe/xov ye eTrayyeAAet? : " idem proverbium habes 
Phaedr. 242 B ubi schol. evrt tmv ayada dyyeAAoi'Tcuv, ep^vqa-drj 
ravTYjs Kat ev t(x rpiTio tojv No/xwi', dein Trpoa-avres est i. q. arySes 
ut interpretatur Hesych." (Stallb.) 



BOOK IV 

704 a 1. " Well, what are we to understand that your city is 
going to be?" ("I don't mean," he goes on, "what it is called 
now, or what name is going to be given it, but, is it going to be 
a coast town, or an inland town ? ") 

a 4. Kat 6 KaroiKtcr/Ao? avrijs. " the mere circumstances of its 
founding ; " e.g. who founded it ? or how was it done ? Plato later 
speaks of this imaginary city as rj Mayv-JTiov TroAt? 860 e 6, 

414 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 704 a 

946 b 6, 969 a 5. The names Bvpaa and NcaTroAt? and KXa^ofxevat 
would fall under this head. 

a 5. TTOTafxov Ttros . • . 67r(ovv/xta, " a name taken from some 
river." Cp. 626 d 4 tt^s Beov kTroivvixias d^tos. 

b 1. TrpoaOcLrj Trjv avrc^v <f>'qixr]v . . . TToAet, " will confer on 
the new-born city the sacred sound by which they themselves are 
called " — almost " their own special associations " ; (fi-qfj^rj, in such 
a connexion, has a flavour of sanctity. — As I think that avrtuv 
refers only to Trora/xo^, Kpyjv-q, and Oeot, and not to KaTotKio-/xo9 
and TOTTO's, I would remove the comma which Burnet puts after 
r6ir(ji. We can get an imaginary Solt] for KaroLKLo-iMos and 
TOTTOS out of irpocrdeiy]. — (Apelt, Eisenach prog. 1901, would read 
yevviDixevT] for yevoficvrj, an attractive suggestion which removes 
all difficulties in the construction ; Trpoo-Oeir] would govern rovro 
and yevi/. would govern <f)-jfnf]v. H. Steph. would put in Socr) (Fie. 
'* dabit "), Hug Trotoiry, after tottos ; Schanz would reject rrjv avrcov 
(JiijfjLrjv — all alterations for the worse.) 

b 6. Kara ravra avTrjs, " on that side of it," i.e. at the point 
of the coast which is nearest to it ; this Kara ravra is represented 
in the answer by ravrj). 

c 1. 7r€pl avriqv : cp. above on 685 c 2. — From this sentence, and 
that at c 8 below, we see that ri 8e ; (" what about ? ") may be used 
with a variety of constructions. Cp. Gorg. 509 d, Re-p. 4*70 a, 
Phaedo 78 d. — At c 8 Schanz follows Schneider in reading ri Si ; 

TTiS. 

C 5. It is clear from the context that ov ttolvv is here an un- 
qualified negative ; " None whatever " (Jowett). 

C 10. oXy, Eusebius's reading, is much better than the oAry of 
the MSS. It is the fact that Crete as a whole is mountainous 
which is in point here. This statement does not exclude the 
possibility of there being some level spaces in the territory. To 
say that " every yard " of the new territory is like Crete would 
be nonsense — as if Cretan soil had a colour or texture of its own. 

d 1. The fem. adj. may be meant to agree with ^(co/oav (under- 
stood), see c 6, or possibly with <f>vcrLv from the previous line. 

d 3. oi5 . . . dvLaro^ . . . tt/oos : lit. " not hopeless for," i.e. " not 
unfavourable to." For the same use of irpos cp. Rep. 433 d 
eva/xiAAov {rfj cro(^ia) 7r/3os dperrjv TroAew?, and Symp. 179 a evdeov 
. . . irpo^ dper'qv. 

d 4. el . . . c/xeAAei/ elvai : lit. " if it had been going to be," i.e. 
" if we had had to face the jirospect of legislating for a sea-port 
(it would have been beyond human powers)." Below, at d 7, 

415 



704 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

et firj . . . efxeXXev . . . e^etv means " otherwise it must have 
acquired," lit. " if it was not to acquire." The latter use is a 
quasi-auxiliary one (Goodwin, M. and T. 428 a) ; in the former the 
verb is more alive — has more of its own proper meaning. 

d 5. For eSet without av cp. Goodwin, M. and T. 415 If. 

d 6. TToAAa . . . riBrf koX TTOiKiXa Koi ^auAa : lit. " m9,ny 
ways as bad as they are refined " — " many dangerous refinements " ; 
TTOiKikos here, like ttolklXXij} at Eur. Cycl. 339, has the notion of 
"over-civilized," "over-complicated," "over-refined" (not "dis- 
cordant " as Jowett). Cp. rep. 557 c TreiroiKLXfjievrj Trda-iv yjOea-iv. 

d 7. TotavTrj (f)V(r€L yevofxkvrj^ " in consequence of its natural 
position " ; we should merely say " in consequence." The 
redundancy is quite in Plato's style. Cp. e.g. Rep. 505 b ri irdvra 
raWa ^poveXv av€v tov dyaOov, KaXov Se kol dyadov fiyfSev 
(f>pov€LV ; 

d 8. irapaixvOiov e'x^'j "there is comfort in" (Jowett). — Stallb. 
well cps. Cicero, De rep. ii. 3 and 4, where he talks of the corruptela 
ac demutatio morum in maritime cities, and praises Romulus for 
putting Rome away from the coast. 

705 3-1. oa-ov evXijjieviorepav : cp. above b 8. The better the 
harbour, the more dangerous it was. — o/xws 8e ktA,, "however, 
we will make shift to do with it as it is." Ast and Wagner 
wrongly take these words to mean, " so much the better that it is 
(removed from the sea)" but this entirely neglects the ofxws Se. 
This clause is almost parenthetic — " not that I insist on any 
alteration " ; — the yap in the following sentence goes back to the 
eyyvrepov row 8eovTo<5 rrj<s daXdo-(rr]<s, the danger of proximity to 
the sea. 

a 2. TO p.€v Trap eKacTTrjv rjpicpav rjSv : spoken probably not, 
as the modern reader would be inclined to take it, of the visible 
charm of the sea, but of the convenience to daily life of a varied 
and well-stocked market. Cp. Modern Painters, pt. iv. ch. xiii. 
§§ 17 ff. 

a 3. ovTws = " in a deeper sense than the superficial meaning of 
the words " ; i.e. there is something morally as well as physically 
distasteful about the sea. The words dXjxvpov to yeiTovry/xa occur, 
we are told, in a poem of Alcman. 

a 4. Stot KaTry/Aeias does not go closely with efXTrifXTrXacra, but 
is a quasi-adjectival adjunct probably to xpi^pLaTtcrixov alone ; cp. 
Rep. 371 d and Soph. 223 d, where epiropoL are distinguished from 
Kdin^XoL : the former travel with their goods (and probably sell 
wholesale) ; the latter ISpv/xevoi ev dyopa. . . . {a-y€^6v tl ot dcrOev^a-- 

416 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 705 a 

TttTot Tot (TiOfxaTa /cat d\peLOi tl a\X.o epyov TrpaTTCtv), buy from 
importers, and sell, retail, to natives. 

a 5. "ijdrf TraXLfxf3oXa /cat aTrtcrra, " shifty and dishonourable 
ways," "trickery and cheating," The word TraAt/x/^oAos, which 
seems to have obtained considerable currency in later Greek, is 
explained by Ruhnken {Tim. p. 148), following Harpocration, 
as originally applied to something thrown back on one's hands — 
particularly a slave. Dio Chrys. xxxi. 321 d couples the word 
with TraAt/xTT/oaros. Here Dio seems to use the word in the sense 
of " good-for-nothing " (cp. our phrase " an old shop-keeper," and 
Uncle Remus's " the same old two-and-sixpence " ), but previously 
on the same page he says a healthy nature has nothing ttoAi/x/^oAov 
or Sucrxe/o€s about it, where the words evidently mean shifty and 
spiteful respectively, as the following words identify the char- 
acteristics with aTrdry] and TrovrjpLa. The meaning shifty is 
vouched for by Timaeus's interpretations TroAv/xeTa/^oAds re Kat 
€7rt /xt^ 7^w/xr^ fiYj fi€V(j)v. Both meanings are well attested by 
Ruhnken's quotations. irdXiv in composition, like our back-, has 
often a sinister Significance (cp. TraXivrpLf^-qs at Soph. Phil. 448, 
TraAiyyAtoo-o-os Find. N. i. 88, TraXiyKoros, — backward, backfriend, 
backslide, backbite. Dio in the above passage may well have had 
Plato's words in mind : he says, aAAa tov? /xev Kair-qXavs tovs 
€V TOis /x€T/30ts KaKOvpyovvTas, OL<s 6 /3lo<s eo-Tiv avTodev, (XTTO 
al(r\poK€p8€Las, /u-tcretTe Kat /coAa^ere (? aTro al(rxpoK€p8€La<s 
spurious). 

a 8. TrapafjLvdiov . . . Trpbs TavTa : probably not "an assuage- 
ment of these fears of ours," but "an abatement of these dangers." 
Cp. Thuc. V. 103 eXTTLS 8e klv8vvo) TrapaixvOiov ovcra, and Plato, 
Gritias 115 b irapafxvdia TrXrj(rfxovyj<s. The word is used at 773 e, 
and elsewhere in the Laws, in the sense of "incitement to," and so 
Athenaeus 640 e uses it when he misquotes Plato's Trapafivdia 
7rXT](TfMovrj'i as TrapafivOua rjSovrjs. — Kat to 7ra/x(^o/oos etVat, "the 
very fact that (it) produces all kinds of crops." 

b 1. Schanz's faith in A is here justified. Its original reading 
was undoubtedly SrjXov ws ovk dv 7roXv<f)opo<5 a/xa, and so Schanz, 
rightly, as I think. L 0, Eus., and Stob. follow a text which reads 
8r)Aoi^ (OS OVK dv 7roXv(f>opo^ tc etrj kol irafKJiopos a/xa, and a 
corrector of A (so Schanz), or (as Burnet) the original writer, has 
altered the shorter into the longer form — changing 7roXv4>opo<s to 
TTdp.<^opo<i, and adding the missing words in the margin, so as to 
come before that word. (Stob. has rts for re.) The o/xotoTcAevrov 
provides a likely explanation of the omission, but the shorter form 

VOL.1 417 2e 



705 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

gains so much in lucidity as to make it preferable. For the 
omission of et-q cp. Rep. 371 a 1 Sv av avTots XP^^^' 

b 4. KaKov goes with ets yev. Kal 8lk. rjOcov Krrja-Lv, much as 
dviaros was used with Trpos dperrjs Krija-Lv at 704 d. — dvd' hos eV : 
cp. Rep. 331 b, Phil. 63 c. This phrase, though often used with 
superlatives, or expressions equivalent to superlatives, does not in 
itself mean "prae ceteris" (Ast), or "above all" (L. & S.) — here, 
for instance, it could not be so translated — but it is like our 
" taking one thing with another," " taking it all round." The 
similar ets Trpos eva, however, at Laws 738 e and Epin. 976 e, has 
acquired (from its constant use in comparison) just this sense of 
"above all." Cp. 647 b, 738 e. 

b 6. €v rots Trpocrdev XoyoiS : at 696 a ov yap p,'q ttotc ykvr^rai 
Trais Kttt dvYjp Kol yepcov Ik Tavrrjs rrjs Tpo(f)rj<s, Sia^e^wv Trpos 
dperi^v, where the Tpo(f)y] referred to is the KaKos jSlos ou ol twv 
Bia<fi€p6vT0)s ttAovctiwv kol TvpdvviDV TratSes ra ttoAAo, ^wcriv. 

C 5. TT/oo? TO, Twv'evTos Twv ttXolcov P'^p'T] '. there is a slight 
redundance here. Badh. insists on correcting to Trphs rdvTos, and 
Schanz follows him. But why might not Plato say " for the parts 
of the ships' interiors," instead of " for the parts inside the ships," 
or "for the inside parts of the ships"? Cp. Prot. 334 b, where 
Tot €^o}dev and to. evros rov a-(i>fxaros are used for the exterior and 
the interior of the body, and Phaedr. 247 c at 8e OeiDpcvcri tcl e^w 
Tov ovpavov (not " the things beyond the ovpavos" but " the 
outside of the ovpavos "). 

c 6. There is a Platonic redundance also about the cKao-Tore 
("always") following on dvayKatov {ka-Ti). 

c 7. Kal ravra . . . ttjs ({>v(T€(ji)s, " that natural feature of the 
country also is a good one." 

C 8. TL 8y] ; " how so ? " 

c 9. " It is well that a city should find it difficult to follow its 
enemies' example to its cost." — For the double ace. cp. below on 
742 e 3. 

d 2. Schanz says that A reads Sr^ t6, and this seems to me to 
lead up to the Ath's. answer better than the usually received 8r) rt. 
It is " Have you anything that has been said, in your mind, when 
you say that ? " To which the Ath. answers, in effect : " Yes ; but 
it is something that was said some time ago." 

d 3. What he means by (^vAarrc //.€ is further defined at e 1 ff., 
i.e. " take care that I do not fall into (1) the error of putting 
something else before virtue, or (2) that of exalting one kind of 
virtue at the expense of the rest." — I. Bruns, p. 170, of course 

418 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 705d 

regards this reference to Bk. I. as the work of his "Redaktor." 
The mention of Crete which follows suggested the interpolation 
to him, he says, and he further remarks that, inasmuch as avBpela 
alone suffered as the result of the "bad imitation" in question, 
the interpolation "does not fit." But, though exclusive care 
for one virtue is wrong in a legislator, it must surely be right 
for him to oppose the stifling of any one virtue, when it is 
threatened. Thereby he is avoiding the first of the two dangers 
mentioned above, i.e. that of setting something else higher than 
virtue. The following words tovtov yap . . . rdv TrpoeLprjfxevoiv 
— which Bruns apparently does not include in the " interpolation " 
— show that Plato is here thinking of that first danger. 

d 5. eA-eyerryi/ : for the termination cf. Curtius, Gk. Verb i. 80 
(p. 54 Eng. trans.). 

d 8. TO 8e : adverbial, " whereas " ; cp. 642 a 3. 

706 a 1. OTO) av . . . jxovii) : this sentence was a puzzle to the 
scribes of our earliest MSS. and is a puzzle still. A originally 
wrote TovT(Dv, KaXiov and fiovo), L and originally wrote tovtiov, 
and KaAov, and wrote /xovwv. In A and tovtmv is corrected 
to Tov Twv, and a late hand in A gives twv alone ; corrects 
fjLovoyv to ftovo), and A fxovo) to fioviov, and a late hand in A has 
/xovov. One way out of the difficulty is, with Schneider and 
Schanz, to write (ory av crvvexws) twv del KaXwv n crvviTrrjTai 
/xovov. Stallb., the Zurich edd., and Wagner read tovtwv twv del 
KttAwv (the two latter read /xovov for /xovw). Burnet is the first 
to print L's and O's KaXov. (Ast commends KaAov in his note, but 
does not print it in his text.) This, I think, with A's original 
TovTojv and /xovo), gives the best reading of the passage. The 
awkward tovtwv, which depends on otw /xovw, is used generally of 
objects of legislation ; orw, with which /xovo) agrees, is dat. after 
(Tvv€7rr]TaL. We may translate : " only at that among the objects 
of legislation which is attended throughout its whole operation, and 
on every occasion, by some laudable result." — I believe, with Ast, 
that the tt/jwtov xj/evSos was the conversion of KaAov to KaAwv. 
The case seems to demonstrate the independent value of L and 0. 
(Bitter, accepting Hermann's ingenious tov 6t(^ dv a: twv del 
KaAwv, reads /xovov for fxovo) ; F.H.D. prefers Hermann's solution.) 
— For the Slkt^v to^otov cp. 934 b \prj . . . tovs vojjlovs to^otov 
fxrj KaKov (TTO\d^€(T0aL Slkyjv tov Te peyedovs ktA. — We find del 
crvvexws together at 807 e (and Hdt. i. 67) — hence Winckelmann 
would read here o-vvexw? del twv KaAwv. 

a 2 ff. TO, aAAa o-v/x7ravTa are ** all the other objects of 

419 



7o6a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

legislation," and twv Trpoeiprjixkviav at a 4 are " the aforesaid 
objects," i.e. that the law should promote (1) virtue, and (2) virtue 
in general. 

a 4. ov TvyyavYf : a very vague expression. So we might say 
"is to be got by it." — rr]v Se 8^ . . . ytyveor^at, "the dangerous 
imitation of one's enemies, to which I referred, arises in the 
following way." 

a 7. After the apologetic parenthesis the e'Aeyov ytyvecr^at 
construction is abandoned, and direct narrative is substituted. 

a 8. yap St^ like (the suggested) ^xj yap at 638 a 7, " for instance," 
" in fact." 

b 7. av . . . a-vvqveyK€v : so put because the Athenians did not 
then become a sea power. The difficulty with Minos and the 
Minotaur was got over in another way. (Plato mentions the 
story also at Phaedo 58 a b.) The yap before av, to which Stallb. 
takes exception, explains and justifies the application of the adj. 
KaK-qv to fiLfJLr](TLv in a 5. 

C 1. fxovipniiv is in strong contrast to the following TrvKva 
aTTOTrr^SwvTa? (" making constant starts "), SpofxtKios . . . a7ro;((opetj/, 
and fir) ToA/xwvTas dirodvocTKeLV /xevovras. Plutarch twice quotes 
Plato's fjiovL/xiuv oTrXiTiov : at Themist ch. 4, and at Philopoemen ch. 14. 

C 2. SpofXLKios raxvi *' as fast as their legs would carry them." 

C 3 f . 8oK€Lv is in direct, elKvtas avrois ytyvea-dai 7rpo<fid(reis in 
loose dependence on the Wto-Oyjvat in c 2. 

C 6. Both the S-^ and the rtvas are scornful. — ovk al<T\pdq, ws 
<^ao-tv, cfivyds : perhaps Plato had in mind Archilochus's dcrTrts 
cKeivr] ippkroi' i^avTis KTrjcroyuat ov KaKiw (Bergk, Anih. Lyr., 
Archil, fr. ; cp. also similar confessions in fragments of Alcaeus and 
Anacreon, and in Hor, Od. ii. 7. 10). 

c 6-8. What is wanting to make this passage intelligible is 
(1) the discovery of a poem (such as those referred to in the last 
note) in which the words ovk alcrxpd'S . cfivyds occurred, and (2) 
another poem in which the words of the author of the first one 
were spoken as " worthy of infinite praise " (e.g. a^t' eiraLveiadaL 
p^vpiopLvpidKL^). As it stands it seems remarkable that so much 
should be made of phrases or expressions applied to the conduct just 
described. (Does p. mean " words of command " ? F.H.D.). If, 
with Schanz, we reject pjixaTa, our mind is naturally fixed, all 
through, mainly on the conduct and habits (WLcrOrjvaL c 2, Wr] 
kSi^iiv d 1) of those who use a navy. On the other hand it is 
hard to see what could have induced any scribe to put in pr^xaTa 
if it wasn't there, while the elaborate /xeiwcrts of ovk a^. . . . 

420 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 706 C 

TovvavTtov is almost equally out of place. Another correction of 
the passage which is attractive — especially if prj /xara be retained 
— is that made by " Coraes ad Plutarch. Vol. i. 208. 20 " (Stallb.) 
of Tavra to rotavTa. Stallb. defends ravra by referring to Phil. 
16 c ravT-qv (ft-q/x-qv irapedocrav, and — for the absence of the art. — 
Phil. 65 d 7 and Laws 702 d 1 (so too 685 e 4). (If the suggestion 
that we are here dealing with a poetical quotation be accepted, 
perhaps the poetical ATJ/xara — as F.H.D. suggests — was what Plato 
wrote.) 

C 8. Ast is probably right in writing TroXkaKUTfxvpLtDv as one 
word; cp. Theat. 175 a 4. 

d 2. TO Twv TToAfcTwi/ jSeXTKTTov fJi€pos i the assumptiou that 
soldiera are the aristocracy of a state is more explicitly made in 
the Republic. 

d4. aiJT(f5 : a kind of "ethic" dat. = *' in his" (i.e. Homer's 
" representation," *' according to Homer " ; cp. Rep. 389 e ola Kal 
'Opj/ow Aio/xrJ8rys Aeyet, and Ar. Poet. 1456 a 27, and Pol. 1339 b 8. 

d 5. KaTexofx€V(t)v, " hard pressed " ; cp. Xen. Gyn. 9. 20 
piirrovdt 6e kov et? rrjv ddXarrav eav KaT€)(0)VTai. 

elff. H 96-102. The chief difference between Plato's quota- 
tion and our Homeric text is that he has TroXep^ov (e 5) in the 
place of our irokepbov. If Plato wrote the gen. he must have 
meant " lay hold on," " take earnestly to," fighting. At the 
same time Thuc. at i. 112 uses ecrxov tov TroXkpLov in the sense 
of " stopped " fighting. — Other variations are cvcreA/xov? for 
cvo-creAjUors, cAkcii/ for eA/<e/>e,€i^, eeXSop^evotcn for eTTLKpaTeovcn, 
and of dyopeveLs for 6pxap,€ Aatuv. In all points, I think, our 
Homeric text is better than Plato's. 

707 3" 5. The MSS. read a/za a-ioTrjpia rt/xas. Badham would 
read cro)Trjpias, taking a/xa adverbially with 7r/3os tovtol^, and 
Schanz and Apelt follow him. Although a/xa a-iOTrjptc^ Tt/xas may 
be possible Greek for '* honours conferred in the hour of deliver- 
ance," yLyvopL€vr]^ in b 1 must go with croiTrjplas expressed or 
supplied — it cannot, as Stallb. wants, go with ep€TLK7]<s — and 
Ti/xas in the sense of price takes a genitive naturally ; also the 
temptatation to a scribe to put a dat. after a/xa is a strong one. 
On these grounds I accept Badham's emendation. — The a/xa, 
though perhaps improving the rhythm of the sentence, seems 
Bomewhat redundant ; but ot/xat, which Apelt would substitute for 
it, is out of place in such a decided expression of opinion. — We 
may translate : " Again, cities which owe their power to their 
navies do not confer the reward for their deliverance upon the 

421 



707 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

heroes of the fight. The victory is won by the arts of the pilot, 
the boatswain and the rower, and by a miscellaneous and dis- 
reputable crowd (who exercise these arts), and there can be no 
proper bestowal of honours upon individuals" 

a 6. Tw KaXXi(rTO) Twv TToXe/jLLKoiv : T<x KaXk. is neut,, and rwv 
TTok. masc. ; lit. " the noblest element among the fighters." For the 
generalizing use of the neut. cp. 731 e rvffiXovraL yap irepi to 
(jiiXovjxevov 6 (^iXQ>v. (rots KaXXtcrTOis here would have sounded 
like " the handsomest.") 

b 1. TravToSawiov kol ov iravv cnrovSatiDv dvOptoTrciiv : Heindorf 
on Phaedr. 243 c has collected passages from Greek and Latin 
authors where " sailors " is used as a term of abuse. — The Kai 
before TravroSaTrcov, which is in all the MSS., was omitted from 
all printed texts before Stallbaum's, and is again rejected by 
Schanz. Ast omitted the Stct before Kv/SepvrfTiKrjs iind put it in 
the place of the Kat before TravroSaTrwv. This greatly simplifies 
the construction, but impoverishes the sense. — The extraordinary 
cperpLKrjs of the MSS. was corrected by Aid. 

b 3. The importance of bestowing public distinction has often 
been urged already — e.g. at 631 e riyuwi/ra opdws . . . Kat ari/xa- 
^ovra, and 632 c Kat Ttyu,a§ ao-Tiva$ avTOL<s aTrove/xetv Set, and more 
particularly at 697 a b TToAtj' . . . rrjv pieXXovcrav (rio^ecrOai re Kal 
€v8aLjxovr]creiv eis SvvafMiv dvOpiOTrtvrjv Sei kol dvayKaiov TLjxd<s tc 
Kat drtfMLas Stave/xetv opOoiS. Cf. Dio Chrys. xxxi. 321 tl yap 
ea-TLV lepix>T€pov TL/xyj<s rj x^iptTos ; occurring in a passage where a 
corrupt distribution of public distinctions is denounced as a 
" debasing of the moral currency." 

C 1. The Ath. does not say that Artemisium and Salamis had no 
part in the deliverance of the Greeks from Persian despotism, but 
that they did not either begin or complete that deliverance. After 
all, he adds, mere preservation is, from our present point of view, 
not nearly so important as the effect of one or the other style of 
fighting upon the character of the citizens. 

C 2. As at 698 e 4, Schanz rejects the ly before MapaOiovi. 

c 7. o-ot {dat. ethicus) indicates that the fresh point is in 
Cleinias's favour. 

d 1. d7ro/3X€7rovT€<s . , . t)yovfjb€voi : the participles here, as 
often, contain the main ideas : " The truth is, our object in 
these inquiries, whether into the nature of the country or its 
institutions, is to secure the right sort of constitution, for 
we don't think, as most men do . . ." — TroAiretas dper-qv : not 
as Stallb. " civitatis virtutem " — that point comes in later with 

422 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 707d 

to? /Bekria-Tovs yiyvearOaL — but "the excellence of its political 
arraiigemeuts." 

d 3. /aot'ov, " above all other things," " of all things the (most 
valuable}." 

d 4. yiyvecrdai t€ kol clvai balances the o-w^eo-^ai re Kal elvai 
of d 2 f., just as x^/aas </)vcriv is balanced by vo/xojv ra^tv. 

d 5. In effect the same lesson was taught at 687, where 
national preservation and independence is declared not to be 
enough to ensure real happiness to a state. Cp. also 628 c 6 dpa 
ovv ov Tov apia-rov €V€/ca iravra av to, vofii/Ma TiOetr) Tras ; — The 
whole of this noble utterance is clothed in carefully chosen and 
marshalled words (cp. Gorg. 512 d). 

d 8. TT^v avT-qv : the same, i.e., as was advocated €v tols TrpocrOev. 
— For the metaphor Stallb. well compares Soph. 237 b tov Se 
Aoyov, y fSeXTLCTTa 8i€^€L(Ti, (TKOTrOtv avTOS T€ tOi KOLfie Kara, ravTrjV 
Trjv 68ov aye, and Polit. 268 d Set KaB' hepav 68ov Tropevdrjvai 
Tiva. 

d 9. KaTOLKi<T€ii)v (fop which L and have KarotKr^o-ewv) and 
vofxoOea-LoJv correspond more or less to x^P^^ (fiva-tv and vo/jlcov 
TOL^iv respectively at d 2 ; cp. also KaroLKi^ecrdaL t€ kuI vo/xo- 
dcTeia-Sai at 708 c 1. 

d 11. /cat TToAv ye : sc. fSeXTicrTrjv. 

e 4. 17 Kara : it is curious that both Ficinus and Cornarius 
should have missed the force of these words and taken r| as or 

(with TTOTCpOV). 

e 5. vfMiv . . . €ts TTjv \bipav KaTioKLCfxevov^, " have settled in 
your country " ; in vfitv he includes the rest of the Cretans — not 
Megillus. 

708 a 1. rh 8€ Srj . . . TO, vvv ; *'but pray whence do you 
expect to draw the troop of citizens with whom we have to deal 
on the present occasion ? " (" the recruits for your present enter- 
prise " Jowett). rh Trapov qualifies o-T/aaroTreSov, and to, vvv 
qualifies irapov. If to Trapov be taken adverbially, Tot vvv is 
superfluous, and the article is wanted with (rrparoTre^ov — which is 
used as an alternative for the Xews of e 2 above. Cp. 687 a 5 
where the word stands for the whole Dorian population. — i^/xtv 
goes better with irapov than with Xeye ; perhaps it is as well to 
mark this, as Schneider does, by putting commas on each side of 
A.€y€. Burnet is right anyway in rejecting the single comma 
after Xkye which stands in all editions except Schneider's. 

a 3. A is clearly right in reading yevr^o-eo-^ai, where L and 
have yLyvea-Bai. At a 5 all the MSS. have TrpocrSe^aaSaL, which 

423 



708a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Aid. altered to tlie fut. (and so Schanz). Here, however, the aor. 
is probably correct. It may be used, without av, of the moment 
when the colonists, or rather their leaders, "made up their minds 
to welcome " Peloponnesian comrades ; but, more probably, we 
ought to read /xaAio-r* ay jxoi in a 4. 

a 6. ws €^ "Kpyovi ela-iv, " that there are (some colonists) from 
Argos (in Crete)." 

a 7. With TO VopTvvLKov (ycvos) we must supply in thought 
" is from those parts." The Peloponnesian Gortys seems to have 
been in Arcadia, not in Argos. 

a 8. ravrr^S : cp. Rep. 544 c rj Kp-qTLKrj re Kal AaKtJViKr] avrrj, 
and Gorg. 472b tovto to KaXov dvad-qixa; "the distinguished 
city of Gortyn." In classical times, however, the Cretan Gortyn 
or Gortys was better known than the Arcadian one. It is men- 
tioned at B 646 and y 294. 

b 2 f . oTav jxrj . . . y iy vqrai . . . oiKt^>/Tat : Stallb. cites 
a parallel from Gorgi 505 e to this " explanatory " asyndeton : 
tVa ixoL TO Tov 'KTriXap/xov yivrjrai, a irpo rov 8vo avSpes e'Aeyov, 
eh &v tKavos yhoijxai. In both instances we may think (very 
likely wrongly) that the sentences would have run better if 
ytyvr^raL and yevrjrat respectively had been absent. 

b 4. For iroXiopKeiv in the figurative sense of " hem in," 
"bring pressure to bear on" cp. Xen. Mem. ii. I. 13 and 17, 
and Ale. II. 142 a. 

b 8. apSyjv KpetTTOvL KparrjOeLGra TroAe/xo) : KpetTTovu agrees with 
TToAe/xo) (not, as Schneider, Wagner, and Jowett, " conquered by a 
superior power in war "), but it may be doubted whether Plato meant 
" (completely overpowered) in an unequal contest," or " by an 
irresistible attack " ; I think the latter. — Cp. Milton, Par. Lost, vi. 
454 " Against unequal arms to fight in pain." 

C 1. rfj /xev, "in some respects," ttj 8c, "in other respects." 

C 3. e^ei : the " pregnant " use of €;(€t in the sense of Trapk\€L ; 
cp. Thuc. ii. 61. 2 to p^kv Xvirovv e^et ri^-q tyjv atcrOTforLv eKacTTO). 
— KOLvcovov lepwv ov : there is an anacoluthon here ; 6V must 
agree with y€vo<s, which is ace, but it may be doubted whether if 
a fern, noun had been in the place of ycj/os we should have had 
ovcrav here ; ov (and ave>(€Tat) proceed as if yevos had been the 
sulgect of a previous direct statement ; 6v is "since it is." 

c4. For aAAa? with a gen. of comparison cp. Gorg. 512 d opa 
p,rj aAAo TL TO yevvatov Kal to aya^ov y tov crw^eiv Te Kat 
(Tio^ecrOaL. 

C 5. The 8' is adversative to cvTreraJs dvexerat, " instead of 

424 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 708C 

that the disaffected body, whose withdrawal is sometimes due to 
bad laws, and which wants to go on living in the same ways which 
were fatal to it before, because it is used to them, etc." This 
is better than to take to 8' adverbially. It is wrong to supply 
y€vo<s with ecnacnaKoSy I think. 

d 1-7. " On the other hand, while a miscellaneous con- 
glomeration of colonists has not, as a body, prejudices which 
hamper the lawgiver, it takes a long time and great effort to 
bring about true union in such a case." The 8' in d I corresponds 
to the /A€v in c 2. Then follows a consideration on the other 
side : " after all, we must face the (last mentioned) difl&culty, re- 
membering that the work of a lawgiver and founder must in any 
case demand exceptional ability and virtue." 

d 3. G-vfjLTrv€V(TaLj " coalesce." So Ar. Pol. v. 3 crTacnwTtKbv 
Si Kal rh fxrj 6/xo</)vAov, €(os av (rvixTrvevarrj — exactly the same 
observation as that in the text. 

d 4. The MSS. have KaO' eVa ek ... For Kad' em Stallb. 
would tead KaO' eV, and Herm. (pref. to vol. vi.) Kadkvra. I suspect 
that the correct reading is Ka0' eVa et?, with commas before and 
after, — "man by man" — a phrase similar in form to avO' kvo<; eV 
at 705 b, and tt/jos eVa ets at Demosth. G. Mid. p. 557. The case 
of €ts is a difficulty, at first sight a fatal one ; but perhaps the 
cacophony of KaS* eva eVa led the writer to proceed as if the 
sentence, like the preceding one, had a finite verb. No €ts is 
wanted with ravrov a-viJL<f>v(Trj(Tai (" to pipe the same tune "). 

d 6. ovTcos (the reading of the text of A and of the margin of 
L and 0) — " in the nature of the case " — is better than L and O's 
o/x(os — "after all" — but the latter would give a tolerable sense, 
which ovTO)?, the third MS. variant, would not. 

d 7. If the MS. reAcwTarov is correct, the meaning is that 
" law -giving and city-founding is a sovereign specific for manly 
excellence." (Cp. Gritias 106 b (fxipfiaKov . . . TeAcwTarov kol 
apia-Tov cftapfxaKiDi', ^TTLCTT'qfMrjv.) This leaves dvSpiov in an 
adjectival relation to dperijv ; but why should " manly " excellence 
be specified, and what connexion has such a statement with what 
has gone before ? I think Badham was right in reading TcAew- , 
TttTwv, but I would not, with him, read ecrrtv and take the 
sentence to be a question. — For the connexion with what has gone 
before see above on d 1-7. (If it were a question I should prefer 
the MS. TeAewTttTov — " is it such a specific as we assume ? ") — 
For Trpos in the sense of " (to be good) at," or " in reference 
to," cp. Ale. I. 120e Tckeovs . . . tt/jo? dpeTyjV, Prot. 318 c 

426 



708d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

/^eArto) TTpos ypaffuKi/jvy Phaedr. 263 d rexvLKiorepo'^ . . . Tr/abs 
X.6yovs. 

d 8 ff . "I don't doubt it," says Cleinias, " but I don't quite see 
why you say so just now." Then the Ath. pulls himself up short, 
— much as he did in Bk. III. at 686c 7, — as if suddenly struck 
by a consideration which would modify his previous statement. 
This dramatic device would not be necessary if his two interlocutors 
had been men of greater intellectual power than they are repre- 
sented to be. — F. Doering (p. 17) argues that the whole jmssage 
from etKos to /jiaKp<^ at 712 a 7 is an interpolation — written at an 
earlier time while Plato still held the views maintained in the 
Eepuhlic. Zeller held that the passage was not Plato's at all, but 
a hash-up of the passages in the Republic where Plato says his ideal 
state can only come into being if either philosophers become kings, 
or kings philosophers. He relies much on the occurrence of the 
words ixv-qfjitDv, evfiaOijs and /xeyaXoTrpeTnjs in 709 e, as compared 
with Bep. 487 a. But' the idea of the passage in the Laws is not 
the same, but one more in keeping with the practical tone of the 
treatise. He does not suggest, as he did in the Rep. — 473 b ff. and 
elsewhere — , that philosophers should be made kings, or kings 
philosophers, but that a well -endowed and well-disposed despot 
might be so fortunate as to secure the services of a vo/xo^€T7/9 
a^tos kiraivov (710 c 8). 

What the Ath. says in this passage is : "After all, are we not 
in danger of expecting too much of, and of attributing too much 
to even such Oeloi avSp€<s as we have postulated ? " Cleinias's 
question has made the Ath. pause, and " go back on " — kiravniiv — 
the subject of the legislator ; and he is suddenly impressed with 
the view expressed later by Dr. Johnson, as to the " small part " 
played by " laws " in curing the " ills that human hearts endure." 
We may imagine a short interval of silence after Cleinias's question. 
Then the Ath. says : " I fancy the result of my reconsideration of 
the matter of the vofiodkraL will be that I shall say something 
actually (xai) derogatory to them as well (a/xa). But if my remark 
is at all apposite, no harm will be done. After all, why should I 
, mind ? It is pretty much the same with all things human." 

el. It was perhaps the contrast between this remark and the 
high compliment just paid to lawgivers that led to O's variant of 
kiraivQiV fox iiravniiv. 

e 2. Trpbs Katpov rti/a, like et's TLva . . . Kaipov at 926 e 9, 
"not unseasonably," "to the point." — Bitter takes the whole 
passage quite differently ; i.e. " I think I am going to point out a 

426 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 708e 

practical difficulty (rt (ftavXov) ; but if we develop our theory in 
view of its application at tlie right moment" — i.e. the Kaipos 
referred to at 709 b 7 as the right moment for the application of 
skill. But Aeyw/xev here must refer to €p€iv. — Stallb. takes tl 
^avAov to mean " admodum vulgare quiddcmiJ' 

e 3. For ovSev Trpayfxa {ka-rt) cf. 794 e 6, and Heindorf s note on 
Hi'pp. Ma. 291 a. — Svcrxe/aaiVw is indicative; cp. Eur. Med. 873. 

709 a 7. A probably read aKat/Diat, though the last letter is 
erased ; the vox nihili crKcwpiat which occurs in its place in one 
MS. of Stobaeus, Ed. — a mistake, as Meineke says, for the late 
(TKaiiopiaL — confirms this. Following on Aot/^wv re e/xTrtTrrov- 
T(i)Vj aKatplak makes an impossibly harsh anacoluthon, and we 
must either, with Ast, reject the re or, with Stallb., read aKatpias. 
I prefer the latter. At Symp. 188 b Plato says that Aot/x.ot and 
many other diseases of different kinds are engendered by unseason- 
able weather. Ast's rejection of tc would make it appear that the 
koLfjLoi had caused the aKaipiat as well as the voo-ot. — ^povov ctti 
TToXvv and TroAAaKts are almost adjectival = '' lasting," and 
" frequent." — kvcavruiv ttoAAwi/, " recurring year after year." — 
rauTtt . . . TravTtt TrpotSwv, " in view of all these possibilities." 

a 8. a.^€uv av ctTTciv : perhaps " would venture to say " (Fie. 
has " non verebitur exclamare " ) ; but the expression is peculiar. 
Stob. has ap^eteVf Stallb. conj. d^tuxreuv ; Heindorf thought the 
error lay in ctTretv, and would substitute elirwv for it. OvrjTwv^ 
the variant in L for dvrjToVj is probably the genuine reading. 
Fie. has ''mortalium neminem." 

b 2 ff. TO 8' ecTTtv . . . av deirjv. t^ ttcus ; " But the fact is 
(to 8'\ while one may say all this with apparent truth about 
seamanship and navigation and medicine and generalship, there is 
at the same time something else which may be equally well said 
on the very same subject." 

CL "What is that?" 

Ath. '* That everything is (not Chance but) God, and that God 
has two auxiliaries by which all human affairs are managed, 
Chance, and Fit Occasion. That with these, however, we must 
not forget that there is associated a third, of a gentler nature, 
namely Skill I call it a great advantage that skill in navigation, 
rather than the opposite (17 fi-q) should co-operate with the ripening 
of the occasion in a storm." 

Stallb. takes to in b 2 to be the obj. of elirovra and to mean 
" this," and TravTa TavTa to be " per asyndeton additum " to the 
previous words, comparing e.g. Rep. 598 b ct/cvtoto/xoi/ T€KTOi/a, 

427 



709 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Tovs aXXov<; Brnjnovpyovs. It seems better to take to adverbially, 
particularly because iravra ravra seems, from its position, meant 
to be the obj. of inrovra. — ecrrtv in both sentences stands for 

b 7. I take 6eos (jj^ev) Trdvra (eo-rt) to be a doctrine opposed 
to that expressed at b 1, tvx^'^ ^' e^vat (tx^^ov ajravra. Cp. 
Aesch. Frag. 65 a Dind. Zevs rot to, iravra. It is usual to take 
6c6<; as one of the subjects to 5taKv/?epvwo-fc, and to identify ri'x^; 
and Katpos as the second guiding agency. (Badham alters Travra 
to Trpcoros and deov to Oeov — naturally enough, if the usual 
view is correct.) But Luck and Fit Occasion are two distinct 
influences. 

b 8. rjfJiepioTcpov : here too I would desert the ordinary inter- 
pretation, which supplies eorTi with rjixepiorepoVy and makes 
crvyxioprja-aL depend on it — " mitius est concedere," Stallb. I 
believe that, by a very mild anacoluthon, the construction (after 
Xkyetv) is varied frOm ws with indie, to an inf. (Selv). To 
describe the admission as ij/xepov is so extraordinary that Badham 
would read fxcTpuorepov. But, used as an adj. describing the 
nature of Texvr], as contrasted with the two other agencies, it is 
apt, and recalls the contrast described at Rep. 410 df. between 
the (TKX-qpoTrjs of the nature whose body only has been developed, 
and the rjjUiepoTrjs of the (faXoarocfios <J)V<tls. re^vi^ then represents 
man^s share in the work of the universe ; luck and " ripeness " are 
not in his hands, but skill is. I would therefore put a comma or 
colon after Travra, remove the comma after Kaiph^, and substitute 
a colon for the full stop after (rvp^Travra. — " Dans les champs de 
I'observation le hasard ne favorise que les esprits prepares," 
Pasteur, Vie p. 88. 

C 1. Kaip(3 ^et/xwvos cannot {pace the dictionaries and the 
translators) stand either for " in a time of storm," or " on the 
occasion of a storm," or (as Stallb.) " at the exigency of a storm " 
(quum tempestas exigit atque postulat), nor even " at the critical 
moment in a storm." All these usages would demand, in classical 
Greek, a preposition with Kat/ow. As at p. 752 a 1, crvXXaf^kcrdaL 
(used absolutely) means " to co-operate," and it naturally takes a 
dat. of the person helped. Here the third agency {rix^l) i^ 
represented as helping the second (Kat/oos). We could get on 
without ;>(ei/xwvo9 (" in a storm "), and rf fi-q (conversationally 
added to Kv/SepvrjTLKyjv in the sense of "rather than the opposite" 
— this is perhaps better than to take yj p,r] with o-vXXa/Scadai, 
i.e. " rather than that it should not "), but an Englishman's fancy 

428 



I 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 709 C 

is hardly enough authority in such a case, Badham rejects both 
XfLfiwvo'i and i) fit] and Schanz follows him. That one version of 
Stobaeus apparently omits fxrj does not give much support to the 
latter omission. (L. &; S. actually take Kvf3. as the obj, of crvXX.) 
[F.H.D. would read ev Katpw and trans. " to intervene in a storm 
at the right moment."] 

C 5. I strongly suspect that Kara tov avrov av '^X^'' ^oyoj/ is 
a commentatoi''s amplification which has wrongly found its way 
into the text. If this was so, Ast's Kal h rots aWois and 
Schanz's kolv tols aAAots are unnecessary. 

C 6. TavTov TOVTO : i.e. the ficya 7rX.€0V€KTrjixa just spoken of. 
In other words, " law-making as much as any task needs sJcill" 

C 7. The asyndeton is of the usual " explanatory " kind. — 
el fjiekX.01 : most editors (including Schanz) follow Stobaeus in 
accepting the easier reading el fxeXXei here, though A and and 
some inferior MSS. have el fxeXXoi. The opt. should be retained ; 
it carries back the mind to the mention of other favourable 
circumstances — of position and soil — made at 704 a ff. — " which 
ought, as we saw above, to be enjoyed by a city, if it is ever to 
be a prosperous one." At Eep. 490 a there is a similar opt. in a 
on clause dependent on dTroXoyrjcro/jLeda — ort . . . 7re(f)VKU}s etrj 
. . . Kttt ovK €7rt/x€voi, where Adam says the opt. represents the 
" philosophic imperfect " in direct speech — " was," i.e. " is, as we 
saw" and where Ast and Madvig change airoXoyqa-ofxeda into a 
past tense. Adam also cps. Charm, 156 b 8, where Madvig emends 
a similar opt. by inserting an av. 

C 8. dX-qOetas e^o/xevov : for dXrjOrj, a form of periphrasis often 
occurring in the Laws ; e.g. 677 c 5 rexurjs exo/xevov for Te^i^tKov. 
It probably goes predicatively with irapaTrecrelv. 

C 9. Setv is used much as at c 1 ; we may supply in thought, 
" we must allow " before it, from ^oreov. 

d 2. The MS. reading is apparently opdm rt, irapbv^ and so the 
early editions. Correctors of A, L, and give a variant Trap 
for Trapov. Boeckh first put a comma after dp^ws, and wrote ri 
for Tt, and all recent edd. except Schanz follow him. But the 
words will not bear Boeckh's translation of ri trapov avrw 5ta 
Tvx'q'i — " ^^ 2^^^ modo contigerint fortuna . . ." The utmost 
we can make of them is to suppose a " double-barrelled " question ; 
e.g. " they would be justified in praying, wouldn't they, for what 
particular thing would it be, the presence of which would render 
nothing further necessary except their skill 1 " irdvv fxev ovv 
answers the first question only, but KeXevofxevoL . . . elireiv in 

429 



709 d 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 5 seems to refer to the second. H. Steph. gets the requisite 
sense by reading opdCjs tl o irapov, and so does Wagner's o, rt for 
Tt ; but Schanz's reading does this with less alteration of the text. 
Heindorf had already objected to the MS. IttcScoi as an impersonal, 
and Schanz reads eTrtSeov (leaving 6pO(o<s rt as in the MSS.). We 
may translate this : " would be justified, wouldn't he, in praying for 
something put in his hand by chance (and) likely to need nothing 
but his skill besides." Kitter well reminds us that opOtJos carries 
us in thought to the ill-advised prayers spoken of at 688 b 6. 

d 6. Tr)v auTwv €vx^v etTreiv, " to say what it was they 
prayed for." 

d 8. Stallb. says we may supply av with Spdcreiev from the 
Ath.'s previous sentence. Better than this is to suppose, with 
Schanz, that 8rj is a scribe's misreading of av, or — better still — 
that 8pd(reL is what Plato wrote, the final ev being due to the 
following €y. 

d 10. TL is governe^d of course by Sto/Aev, not by exova-av. 

e 1. €K Twv AoiTrwv : perhaps " with your remaining resources " ; 
cp. 710 a 1 Twv dX\(j}V v7rap)(ovTit)v 6(f)€X.os ilvai n. For this use 
of €K cp. Rep. 365 d (Tvv(iip.o(rLas . . . crvvd^ofxev, iuriv re Tr€idov<s 
8i8d(rKa\oL . . . €^ &v TO. fiev Treicro/xei/, rot 8e f^LacrofxeOa ; Ast 
however says it means " henceforward " — as it apparently does at 
Ejp. 3 1 6 d 8 — and he is possibly right. 

e 3-6. Kitter's arrangement of this passage, which Burnet has 
adopted, not only involves less change in the words than any — 
except Hermann's — but gives the most natural continuation of the 
dialogue. The MSS. make ^e/ae . . . -q ydp ; a continuous speech 
of the Athenian's : to this CI. answers Nat, and the Ath. goes 
on again with roSe. Besides giving the question ri fxerd tovt 
ktA. to CI., Kitter, following Schramm, alters ; apa to dpa ; {dpa 
is the reading of L). (Schanz adopts Stallb.'s alteration of ^ ydp 
to Tl ydp — which he gives to CI., and with him rejects Nat. To 
this Ritter properly objects that to ttoiov; and not ti ydp; is 
always used in the Laws in such a case. Besides, Stallb.'s rt ydp ; 
is — as he himself says of Schramm's ingenious tov vopoOiT-qv ; — 
*^justo audacius." To Hermann's arrangement, which gives tov 
vo/x. ... 17 ydp ; to CI., and begins the Ath.'s answer Nat 
ToSe ; the objection is that Nat answers one question, and toSc 
another. 

e 4. Burnet differs from most recent edd. in adopting A^'s 
correction of c^/aa^cu^ev to the more suitable (ftpd^o/xev. " In 
saying this we are speaking for the lawgiver, are we not ? " 

430 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 7090 

(Stallb. — reading (^pa^aifxiv — takes this question to mean : " Shall 
we give this answer on the part of the lawgiver ? ") 
e6 ff. See note on 735 d 3. 

e 7. veo'i : youth is not one of the requisites in the case of 
the philosopher-king postulated at Rep. 487 a. It is necessary 
here. An older man would not readily accept the philosophic 
lawgiver's guidance. 

e 8. €v Tois TrpocrOev : i.e. at 696 b 4, d, and e. The (r(D(fipocrvvrj 
he speaks of here — as there — is the gentlemanly self-control and 
self-respect, without which any great powers of body and mind — or 
even character — might be felt as oppressive by the rest of the 
world. 

710 a 1. The MS S. have ry, Tvpavvov/Jicvr) ^pv^rj. I have no 
doubt that Dr. Hagenbutte was right in substituting rvpavvov for 
Tvpavvovfuvr). The scribe doubtless had in mind the previous 
Tvpavvovfiivrjv ttoAiv, and the quite different Tvpavvov/xevrj 4^v\-q 
oi Rep. 677 e. Ast says Tvpavvovfihrj is middle, but even if the 
middle were ever used — which apparently it is not — Plato would 
not use four lines below the same participle in a passive sense. 
Stallb. says Tvpavvovp.kvrj = rvpavviKy ; it certainly has not this 
meaning at Rep. 577 d, and the meaning is not apt here. — eav 
. . , €tvat Ti, " if any good is to come of his possession of the 
other virtues." (This is better than to take ^vxv as the subj. of 
fieWr), and twi/ aAA. vtt. as a gen. abs.) 

a3f. "I think it is (ru}(f>pocrvvr}, Megillus, which the Ath. 
says must be accessory." — ^ yap ; is addressed to the Ath. 

a 5. " Not the philosopher's craxfipocrvvr] " the Ath. answers, 
" but the a-ui(fipo(Tvvrj of daily life." Cp. below 968 a 1 and Phaedo 
82 a 11 ff. with Archer Hind's Appendix 1 to his edition of the 
Phaedo on Si^/AOTi/cr) Kal ttoXltlkt) dpeTrj. — Cp. also the distinction 
at Phaedo 61a between the popular idea of fiovaLKrj and the 
philosophic one. — In disclaiming here the higher and " forced " 
significance of the word, Plato is not rejecting the view of any 
other philosopher, but is claiming the right to define a word 
specially, when the argument has a special object in view. He 
withdraws i.e. from the position adopted by himself e.g. at Rep. 
430 d ff., and, implicitly, even above in the Laws at 689 a ff. For 
the a-vfjLcfxjyvLa there called the highest o-o<^ia (d 6) is the agree- 
ment, between the different elements in man, as to what is best 
and most desirable, and that is much the same as the a-oxfypocrvurj 
of Rep. 430 f. 

a 7. TOis fikv aKparcus ^'x^'^ Trpos Tots i}8ovas . . . rots 8k 

431 



710 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

cyK/oarw? : a similar notional anacolutlion may be seen in the 
addition of re kol art/xtat at 696 d 11, and of •)) fxrj at 709 c 2. 
In all three cases it is necessary to picture to oneself both opposites 
in order to understand the nature of one, and the distinction is 
loosely spoken of as if it was the distinguishing mark of one 
member of the pair. In much the same way we use the word 
distinction in the sense of distinguishing mark. (Schanz would 
reject the tols fxkv and tois 8e clauses as a commentator's explana- 
tion, and Badham would change rois fxkv into rov fxi] and reject 
the Tots Se clause ; but this might be taken to imply that all 
children and animals were temperate, and this, no doubt, Plato 
wanted to avoid.) 

b 1. €</)a/x€v — at 696 e 1. — For fiovovcrdai with a gen. cp. Tim. 
46 e fiovii>6€i(rai <f>pov'q(r€<j)S. 

b 4, ravTrjv ttjv cfivcrcv : i.e. rrjv crwcPpova (f>v(TLv {Polit. 307 c). 

b 5. For the plural (f>vcr€(riv Stallb. (as against Zeller, who 
finds fault with it) dps. Rep. 410 e tovto) tw ^iVet, and 424 a 
<f)V(TeiS dyaOcLS €/x7rot€t. 

b 6. Badham supposes that apicna is a misreading of paia-ra. 
The latter, besides getting support from the paa-To, t€ kol rdxLa-Ta 
at d 8, and from raxos kol pacrrbivrj at 711 a 2, may be thought 
more significant and expressive ; but the dpLuviav in b 8 seems to 
me to put dpLcrra beyond a doubt. 

b 8. Siddea-Ls, " process of settlement." Verbal derivatives in 
Greek retain the power of representing the imperfect as well as 
the perfect and momentary tenses of the verbs from which they 
are derived. 

c 1 f . 01. " How, or by what arguments, could a man ever get 
people to believe that ? " 

Ath. " Why, it is easy to see that it is in the nature of things 
that that should be so." 

C 5. H. Steph. restored el Tvpavvo<s . . , evrvx"*?? from the 
Ath., to whom the MSS. give it, to Cleinias, and Ast saw that St. 
had gone a word too far, and correctly gave ei'T^x^s back to the 
Athenian. 

C 7. The Kara which, logically speaking, should be repeated 
before to yevka-Oat is omitted for rhythm's sake. — For this use of J 
Kara Stallb. cps. Phaedr. 229 d ov irdvv €Vtv\ovs dvSpo<s Kar dXko ~ 
fxev ovoeVj on o . . . 

d 1. I think Stallb., the Ziir. edd. and Schanz are right in 
adopting Ald.'s emendation of the MS. avT(3 to avrw. — Trdvra 
(TX^Sov ktA., " what more could God do for a city ? " 

432 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 7lOd 

d 3. 8evT€pov, " second best " ; for " best of all " had been 
implied in the preceding Sta^epovTcos. — tlv€<s answers to an English 
" say." 

d 4. TpiTOv S' av . . . evavTLov: too-avrws seems to go with Kara 
Xoyov, and not to stand for the demonstrative toctotjtw, which is 
omitted with ^^aAeTrwre/oov, as at Lysis 206 a ovkovv ocrw av 
lx€yaXav\6r€poL oJcrcv, SvcraAwroTe/oot yiyvovrai ; "It would be 
third best, and so on in proportion — more difficult, the more rulers 
there were, and vice versa" 

d 6. dplcTTrjv . . . TToAtv, '* the best kind of state " ; an ex- 
pression more natural in Cleinias's mouth than the more technical 
TToAireiav. 

d 7. pera ... ye, " with the help, of course, of" ; for pLerd thus 
used cp. 720 d 7, 738 d 7, 791 a 7, 862 d 5. 

d 8. ets TOVTO : i.e. els Tr)V dptcTTrjv TroAtv. 

e 1. Sevrepov : not, as above at d 3, " the second best thing," 
but adverbial — " in the second degree." — I agree with Hermann in 
thinking that kol to rplrov €k SrjpoKpartas is not from Plato's 
hand. (1) ttws Aeyets comes more naturally as the end of 
Cleinias's speech than as a parenthesis ; (2) an indication that the 
words did not stand in the original is to be found in the tlvos 
in e 4, which is a sort of apology for the introduction of a new 
element into the consideration. (3) ov(5a/Aws is too strong a negative 
for the circumstances ; for according to the text the second of the 
three polities enumerated is the only one that the Athenian alters. 

e 3. irpoiTov : adverbial, like Sevrepov above ; " in the highest 
degree," i.e. " most (easily and quickly)." 

e 4. fSaa-LXiKrjs : it has been explained in Bk. III. that the 
best form of hereditary kingship is that where, as at Sparta, there 
were two kings at a time. 

e 5. For variety's sake the form of the expression is changed, 
and TO T€Ta/)Tov, like Sevrcpov at d 3, is " the fourth best thing." 
— Burnet does well to put a comma after 6\iyapyJ,a as w^ell as 
before it. — rov toiovtov = " the best form of state." 

e 6. 7rAeto-Tot . . . Si^vacTTai : for the leaders of the demo- 
cracy are not only less numerous, but less secure in their position 
as Si'vacTTat, than the members of an oligarchical class. 

e 7. 8r] is almost " remember." — ravra is the tov tolovtov of 
e 5, i.e. -q dpta-Tr] TroAireia. 

e 8 f. <f>vcr€L as we should say " providentially." (Wagner takes 
it closely with dXTjOrjs, but it goes better with yevrjTaL). — Kocvq — 
so Aid. for the MS. Kotvfj — goes closely with rrpos in the next 

VOL. I 433 2 F 



710 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

line : " a kind of force which he shares with the holders of supreme 
power." — The tl<s helps to express that the kind of force is unique, 
and not to be confounded with mere station and dignity — and is 
against Badham's rather attractive substitution of yvw/xrj for piofj-rj. 
(rts would then be " more or less.") 

711 3'1. TovTo : an extreme instance of the boldness with 
which Plato uses neuter pronouns. It stands for ot iv rfj TroAct 
fxaXiCTTa 8vvd/j.€voi, " this element." 

a 4. TTw?/ does not ask for the grounds of the opinion just 
expressed. It is : " What do you say ? I can't take it in." 
" And yet I have said it often enough," answers the Athenian. 
" It is because you don't realize what rvpavvis is." " No," says 
CI., "and I don't want to either." There is a little impatience 
in the first part of the Ath's. answer — caused perhaps by the tone 
of the question at 710 elf. 

b 1. " Can't you see that the facility I pointed out is involved 
in the notion of a despotism ? " 

b 7. Burnet, by putting commas after iTnrrjSevfxaTa and 
TToAiVas, shows that it is unnecessary with Stallb. to supply iOeXrjcrrj 
with TrpoTpcTrecrOaL — the two eav re clauses being amplificatory to 
oTryTTcp, and divided, to balance the sentence properly, by 
7rporp€7r€crOaL Tov<i TroAiras. 

b 8. vTToypdcfiovTa tw TrpdrTeiw : " metaphora ab iis repetita 
qui pueris ductus literarum praescribunt " Stallb., who cps. for 
the whole passage Claudian's " regis ad exemplum totus com- 
ponitur orbis " {De qu. cons. Hon. 299), and Cic. Legg. iii. 14. — 
The ancients had not formulated the idea of the sovereignty of 
" public opinion." 

C 1. €7raLvovvTa and TtfiiovTa are, in idea, subordinate to 
irpoTpkirea-dai, but the syntactical construction is of the loose order 
common in the long and somewhat straggling sentences of the 
Laws — the intervening v7roypd(f)ovTa being explanatory of 
7rop€V€(r6aL. 

c 3. Kal TTws olo/xeOa . . . ; we should say : " But what makes 
you think that . . ?" A and originally wrote oliopeOa, but it 
is corrected by the first hand to olopeOa. Schneider reads Kai 
TTws olo/xeOa, " et putamus fere" ; Badham goes still further, and 
by reading ttws <ovk> oiofxeOa makes the sentence into an emphatic 
assent. So does Apelt (p. 7), who would read kol tt/oos (adv.). 
But the reading of the text best fits the course of the conversation. 
The emphatic word in the question is Ta\v. The conservative 
Dorian cannot easily imagine any change of view as rapid. The 

434 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 7IIC 

Athenian contents himself with answering that, at any rate, there 
is no other way half so rapid as the way he has pointed out ; and 
then — to familiarize his hearers with his views — he states the same 
thing again in slightly different words. 

It seems clear that Plato means to represent his two minor 
interlocutors as unconvinced at this point. It will be remembered 
that Socrates's young companions in the Republic felt that the 
possibility of ever establishing the ideal constitution was the doubt- 
ful point. The Laws sketches a less " ideal " state — one which 
deviates less than that of the Republic from ordinary conditions. 
But in any change a dead weight of prejudice has to be overcome, 
and a Dorian conservative is a natural mouthpiece for the 
expression of such a prejudice. 

d 1. dWa t68' ecTTt to ^(aAeTrov yevea-dai, "but here is where 
the difficulty lies." For the inf. op. Rep. 521 a eWt crot Swarrj 
yevcaOat TroAts €v oiKovfxkvi]. 

d 2. oAtyov . . . €1/ Tw TToAAw ;(povoj, "rare in history." — ' 
TO yeyovos seems natural enough after yevoixevov av and yaXeirhv 
yevecrOaL ; Schanz thinks it comes from a later hand than Plato's. 

d 6 ff . Cp. Rep. 499 b c . . . ^ twi/ vvv kv 5wao-Tetat§ ri 
/SacriXetaLS 6vt(dv vecriv rj avrois ck Ttvos Betas kirLirvoias dXrjdLvrjs 
<f>LX.o(ro<f>ia<s d\r]6LVo<s €p(i)<s efnrecrr]. , 

d 8. KttTa ttAovtwv vTrepoxas ^la^cpovcrais rj yei/tov : the geni- 
tives are best taken as genitives of definition. The " distinction " 
which gives the authorities a commanding position is one either of 
wealth, or birth. If, with L. & S., we translate kut' vtt. ttA. as 
" (distinguished by) excess of wealth," the zeugma involved in the 
addition of yevwv is very harsh. 

e 1. TTjv NecTTopos . . . <f>v(TLu, and ttJ rov Acyeiv fXj^P'j] '. the 
weapon of the demagogue, among other " powers," is to be pressed 
into the good cause. Naturally it must be wielded by one whose 
temper is the opposite of the demagogue's. This reference to 
Nestor takes the place, in the enumeration of " powers," of 
democracy. 

e 4. €(f) rjixiov Se ovSap^ws : this may well be understood as 
vouched for — like the eirl Tpoias ykyovev — by the common voice 
(ws (fiaa-L), not as Plato's own statement. The positive, as well as 
the negative, view thus expressed is left open by the next sentence • 
beginning ct 8' ovv. 

e 5. rjfxojv MSS. Stallb. rightly argues that i^/xwv tls in Plato's 
mouth would not mean " one of the present generation " but " one 
of the present company," and holds that, as we cannot credit his 

436 



711 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

modesty with the latter meaning, he must have said e<^' rjfxiov 
here. I suspect that what Plato wrote was rjfiLv, and that the 
scribe's eye was caught by the rjfjiojv in the preceding line. — K. 
Hackforth, The Authorship of the Platonic Epistles, p. 153, 
surmises that Plato here has in mind the young Hipparinus, the 
son of Dion. This conjecture, he says, if correct, would fix the date 
of the composition of Bk. IV. at 354-3 B.C. 

e 8. (TvixTrdcrrjs Swafxeois . . . Trept : i.e. " whatever the form of 
the government be," or " in whosesoever hand the supreme 
power may lie." 

e 8 ff. orav . . . (Tv/xTrea-r), " quando aliquo in liomine 
prudentiae et temperantiae conjuncta fuerit potentia summa " 
(Schneider). The cfipoveiv indicates especially the part which 
might be played by the ideal lawgiver. (In the very similar 
passage in Rep. 473 d 2 I would suggest that the comma be 
removed after crv/jiTrea-r) and the difiicult tovto be taken adverbially, 
" in this way " : Katroi^To els rai^Tov (rvfiTrea-y Svvafiis re TroAiTtKr^. 
KoX (jaXocrocfiLa,) 

712 a 3. TiJoV TOLOVT(s)V I 1.6. TWV dplo'TWV. 

a 4. ravTa fiev ovv . . . jxaKpi^ : cf. on 736 b 6 below. " Fancy 
that in this oracular deliverance of mine you have been listening 
to a story when I declare that, whereas in general " (lit. " one way ") 
" it is^hard for a city to get good laws, yet, if only things happened 
as I say, it would be the simplest thing in the world." — Kat, I 
think, does not put a fresh point, but is explanatory of K€\pi^(Tin^- 
Srjo-Oo). I have removed the comma between the two imperatives. 
— KaOaTTcpeL does not, like KaOaTrep, go closely with the adjacent 
noun or adj., but with the verb, i.e. with the whole sentence ; 
here we may translate it "fancy that . . ." — fxvOo^ tls : cp. 
841c 6. According to Plato, conviction does not follow only 
from logical proof ; the mind may accept truth " embodied in a 
tale," or delivered as an oracle. Stallb. cps. Phil. 44 c, Polit. 
304 cd. 

a 8. The connexion of thought is very hard to trace, but 
I do not think it is absolutely necessary to suppose a lacuna 
here, or to accept Susemihl's alteration of ttcos ; to KaAws. This 
remedy, as Susemihl himself felt, renders the TreLpcj/jieOa too 
abrupt, and he was obliged to put in 8r) after that word, ttws ; 
does not refer to the three preceding lines, which need no explana- 
tion, but to TttVTa . . . K€Xpy]friJi<>)8y](T6it) which does. The Ath. has 
said, in effect : " a truce to exact arguments, and historical | 
parallels ; fancy that what I have laid down is a story, told by } 

436 1 

( 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 712 a 

the mouth of an oracle." "Why?" says Cleinias. Then, with 
a natural explanatory asyndeton, the Ath. answers : " Because 
I want to bring your city, Cleinias, into the story, and like 
three grey-bearded children as we are, to make up its imaginary 
laws." 

b 1. I take it that we must supply jxvOov in thought with 
TrpocrapixoTTovTes. — ^oyco — )( e'/ayw — has also the fxv6o<i in mind : 
the laws are not to be real ones ; TrXarTeiv is also chosen as being 
a word associated with fiction. 

b 2. The TratSa of L and and the earlier edd. must have been 
written by someone who had in mind the passage at 789 e, where 
the physical moulding of the still " soft " infant is recommended. 
Stallb. was the first to recall the reading of A on Bekker's and 
Bast's testimony. He rightly explains the " childishness " of the 
proposal to lie, not, as Hermann held, in the comparison, suggested 
by 7rAaTT€ti/, to children's wax modelling, but in the make-believe 
that they are real lawgivers. (Herm.'s ref. to 746 a 8 — though 
throwing light on our passage — does not prove his point.) 

b 5. Burnet's suggested eiraKova-as is certainly an improvement 
on L and O's viraKovcras. Cp. Thompson's note on Gorg. 487 c 5. 

b 8. After the solemn invocation, which seems to promise a 
real start, comes another digression : on the applicability of the 
ordinary classification of polities. None of the names — Democracy, 
Oligarchy, Aristocracy, and Monarchy — seems fully to describe any 
existing polity, and, what is more, it would be a bad thing for it 
if they did, for they all denote the preponderance of one element 
in the state, to the detriment of the others. Nomarchy or — since 
all good laws are inspired by Heaven — Theocracy would best denote 
the perfect iroXirela. Thus the digression brings us round to the 
spirit of the Invocation, and the place of Religion in the state is 
defined, and its importance explained. — TroXireiav : already, at 
a 2, TToXLTela and vo/xol have been placed side by side as objects of 
investigation, and although the whole work is styled No/Aot, as 
contrasted with the earlier work IIoAtTeta, the two subjects are 
felt to be closely connected. In the present work, however, it is 
naturally the apunoi vofiot that are the main subject. 

c 2. oLov 8r) TL Aeyets ftovXrjdeis ; " In what sense do you 
mean your question to be taken ? " — The repeated ocov in the next 
question would in English be : " Do you mean, is it to be ... ? " 

d3. ouTcos, "straight off," "on the spur of the moment"; 
amplified below at e 3 into ovtu) e^ai^fivrjs. 

d 4. Kttt yap TvpavviSt : the Kai reminds us that rvpavvis had 

437 



712 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

been expressly excluded by Cleinias. Even that element is to be 
found in the Sjmrtan constitution. 

d 5. Oavjxa(TTov 109 MSS. As Plato elsewhere says dfxrj- 
Xavoi/ 6(rov, OavfiacTTOv ocroi/, but d/xr/)(av(i>s to? and davfjLa<TTO)<i ws, 
and the like, Schanz is probably right in reading OavfMa(rrio<s here. 
Oavfxaa-ra ojs occurs in Soph. fr. 963 (Dind.), and in a probably 
spurious line in Eur. Iph. Aul. 943 ; but even supposing this to 
be natural Greek in Plato's time, it would not legitimize ^av/xacrrbv 
cos, for Oav/xaa-TOL is used as an adv., dav/JLaa-rov never. 

d 6. Kat Tis • . . cf)aiV€TaL . . . SyjfxoKpaTOVjxevrj €oiK€vai : 
seeing that all the MSS. give SyjfxoKpaTovjxcvrjf it is very tempting 
to adopt H. Stephanus's alteration of the MS. Kat ns to KatVot, 
especially as (1) Heindorf and Cobet disbelieve in eotKcv "(in the 
sense of videtur) with a participle ; and (2) (paLverat coiKcvat 
involves in that case what seems to us an awkward redundancy. 
It must be recognized on the other hand (1) that, if Katrot had 
been written, it is almost impossible to explain its alteration to 
Kttt Tis, whereas (2) the alteration of Syj/xoKpaTovixevrj to the dat., 
in the neighbourhood of eotKevat, is readily conceivable. As to 
the objection taken to €oik€ with a nom. participle, though at Grat. 
419 c (bis) many editors, including Burnet, have followed Heindorf s 
suggestion and altered KeKAr;/xev7y eoiKcv to KeKXtjfxevy eotKcv, and 
though, at Politicus 277 d, one MS. reads eoiKa . . , KLvrjcrai for 
eoiKa . . . Kivi^a-as (so Burnet), at Grat. 408 e all MSS. and all 
editors read eoiKe . . . KardSi^Xov yevofievov dv. The reading in 
the text was suggested by Winckelmann in his edition of the 
Euthydemus p. 74, and adopted by Stallbaum. Cp. also below 
948 b 7 €OiK€v . . . Siavoov/xevos. — Aristotle, at Pol. 1265 b 33, 
seems to be quoting this passage along with some comments on it. 
— Immediately afterwards Aristotle refers to the opinion expressed 
at 693 d as to the desirability of mixing despotism and democracy 
to form a proper 23olity ; a subject cognate to our present one. 

e 4. I think Madvig is right in reading dvepoiTTjOeis for the 
dv I/O. of the MSS. 

e 6. Hermann's Kdyw <^atvo/xat for the MS. KaTa<^aivo[xai is 
attractive, but not necessarily right. 

e 7. diropQi is here used as at Polit. 262 e for ov Suva/aat, and 
with the same construction. There is no need, with Schanz, to 
suppose that we ought perhaps to read riva . . . etTrw (or to 
suppose Set to have fallen out between riVa and ^ua-xvpi^opLevov). 

e 8. For elirelv in the sense of call^ 'pronounce to 6e, cp. Soph. 
225 a 12 Tt Tts . . . aAAo itirrj ttXtjv dp.(f)i(Tf3y]TrfTi.K6v ; 

438 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 7l2e 

e 9. oi'Tws yap kt\.j " that is because," with a bow 
(w apfXTToi), "you really live under constitutions. None of the 
arrangements we have just named are constitutions. They are city 
settlements in which one component part rules, and the rest are 
slaves. The name specities the ruling part in each case. If you 
had to name your community on that principle" (lit. "after any- 
thing of that kind "), " the right thing was for its name to 
designate the only real master of rational beings, and that is their 
God." In other words, "if it was to be a '-cracy,' at all, it 
must be a * Theocracy.' " 

713 a 3. A has to tolovtov, and Schneider and Schanz are 
content with this. Stallb. (in his notes) will have nothing but to 
Tov TOLOVTOV, which is in and some minor MSS. In both cases 
TO would have to be taken to mean to ovofia, and this assumption is 
a violent one. L has eiirep tov tolovtov — the gen. of that after 
which a thing is named; this is better, but Burnet's et-n-ep tov 
TOLovTov is much better still, and gives just the sense we want. 
Possibly the reading to tov either got in by mistake, from the t^ 
TOV Sea-iroTov just above, or was a deliberate adaptation to the to 
ToG dX.y]6ii)<s below ; and A's reading may well have been a correc- 
tion of that. — Perhaps XPW ^^^ ^'^^' ^^® " philosophic imperfect," • 
as Adam calls it on Rep. 490 a 7, and if so, they should be translated 
by presents. — I think Ritter (D. des Inhalts p. 31, cp. Gomm. 
p. 110) puts too much into tt^v ttoXlv when he translates it "den 
Musterstaat." tto^lv is used loosely in the place of TroAtTetai/. — 
L and the margin of have dX7]dov<s for dXr]do}s — an ecclesi- 
astically minded correction. 

a 4. I have no doubt Ast was right in rejecting the tov w Jiich 
comes in the MSS. before vovv. Stallb. defends it as meaning 
(mentem) ad earn rem necessariam. 

a 5. TL<s 8' 6 ^€05 ; the question, one may fancy, of a religious 
partizan. The Athenian avoids answering it directly. As Ritter 
says (p. 110), the real answer would have been 6 vop-os, but the 
Cretan was not ripe for such an answer ; and there were modifica- 
tions to be made. epfxeXios ttcus hints that the subject is one 
which needs careful handling. 

a 6. In the fxvdii) and the cVt (if genuine) and the irpocr- we 
may see a further reference to the /xv^os Tts Ae^^^eis at 712 a 4. — 
Schanz says A has ye tl (for y' eVi) ; at all events at 684 d 1 the c 
of yc is not elided before eVt. 

a 8. Wagner, Schanz, and Burnet are probably right in adopt- 
ing Schneider's distribution of this difficult passage between KA. 

439 



713 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

and A9. The MSS. give ovkovv . . . Spav to the Ath., and 
TTOLvu [xkv ovv to Cleinias. Herin. transposes the two passages, 
making ovkovv . . . Spav (not as a question) the beginning of the 
Ath.'s next speech. But ttolvv /xev ovv is not apposite in Cl.'s 
mouth. He cannot be expected to see at once that a /xvOos will 
help them. But it is likely that he should be rather puzzled by 
the suggestion, and ask : " Is that the way we have to proceed ? " 

a 9. efXTrpoa-Oe : i.e. in Bk. IIL 678 ff. 

b 1. The place of rovroiv makes it clear to the ear that ttoAccov 
is governed by the comparative irporkpa. 

b 3. It would be interesting to learn the origin of L and O's 
strange variant of apicrTOKpaT€irai for A's apicrra oiKctrat — which 
L and have in the margin. — ^s /j.LfjLr]fxa 'iyova-a : cp. Eur. Hel. 
74 oa-QV /xt/xry/x €)(€i9 EAevrys. 

b 5. CI. is reassured by this orthodox allusion to the good old 
times of Cronos's reign. 

b 8. Kol Tov e^rjs T7€paiviiiv av /xv6ov, " yes, and if you tell the 
story right through ..." 6 e^rj? /xvOos, which, in most con- 
nexions, would mean " the next story," here must be taken to 
mean "the whole story from point to point," not merely some 
incidents in it. Cp. Gorg. 454 c tov e^yjs eVcKa Trepaivea-dac tov 
\6yov, where e^rjs TrepaLvecrOac means " to be brought duly to its 
conclusion," no step being omitted. — The older edd. give this 
speech to Megillus. H. Steph. so assigned the previous speech 
(at b 5) as well. 

C 5. Kaddirep t^/acis 8L€Xr)X.v6afx€v : i.e. at 691 c 5 ff. ovk €crT 
. . . Yjcfidvicrev avTrjs ; 

C 6 flf . LKavr] . , . SiOLKOvcra avTOKpaTiap Travra, fir] ov)(^ vjS. 
T€ Kol d8. /x€(rTova-daL : the participle is here felt to be the 
principal verb. It would be hard to find a case of a bare LKavos 
fxrj TTOteiv in the sense of " able to avoid doing." 

C 8. The MSS. have €^io-t7;to : the last syllable of this 
enormity may here be explained by the assumption that e<f)La-Tr] 
Tore, as Julian quotes it, was the original reading — just as at d 7 
A (ace. to Schanz) has ecj^icrTrjTo Tiov for €(f). to tcov. Hermann first 
put TOTc in the text. 

d 3. TTot/Avtoi? is, in effect, still under the government of 
cc^icrrr/, for which SpCyfiev is a substitute. — ov fSovs kt\. : the- 
asyndeton is of the ordinary explanatory kind. 

d 5. TavTov, like tovto at 686 c 4, TavT at 700 d 1, Tavrov at 
Phil. 37 d and Polit 308 e, is adverbial : "in like manner." 

d 6. One MS. and some early editions read TavTov apa Kal 6 

440 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 713 d 

^€os 8rj. This mistake perhaps led, by imperfect correction, to 
the apa kol which the best MSS. — but not Julian — place before 
(f)ikdv6pii)Tro^, Assuming, with Hermann and Schanz, that 
Julian's text was correct, I conjecture (1) tliat someone wrote 6 
debs apa because of 6 K/oovos apa at c 5, (2) that someone else 
transposed apa and Srj — either inadvertently, or on purpose, and 
(3) that some hasty corrector of this transposition brought along 
the Kttt as well as the apa. — Schramm ingeniously suggested that 
apa Kal stood for cS/oa Kat, but such a superfluity of expression is 
unlikely. — Stallb. first rejected the Kat (before <^tA.), but afterwards 
defended both apa and Kat. — He was very possibly right in 
rejecting the following to — for which Herm. substitutes totc 
as at c 8. 

d 7. p(}a-Tiovt]S : a kind of zeugma ; with avrots it means 
"ease," and with rjp.iv "comfort" or "relief" — as at 779a. 

e 1. With atSw . . . Trapexop^evov Stallb. well cps. Prot. 322 c, 
where Plato calls atSws (mercy) and Slkyj Koa-p^oi re Kal Secrp^ol 
cfuXlas (rvvaydiyoL 

e 2. After ai8<3 Julian has Kat 8r] dcf>6oviav ; A has Kat evvopiav 
Kal dcfidoviav. eXevOepiaVj a well-vouched variant for evvoptav 
(L, and A^ in margin), looks like a deliberate alteration of 
Plato's text. — Stallb. thought the alteration due to the mistaken 
idea that there was a tautology in evvop^tav Kal dcf)Ooviav StK-qs. — 
Inasmuch as Plato afterwards represents good laws as taking the 
place of these divine rulers, it is natural that he should give a 
hint of this beforehand in mentioning their benignant action in 
this direction. evvopLiav and da-Taaiao-Ta are the two most 
important words in this description. They represent severally 
the two branches of the inquiry which have been kept constantly 
before us, i.e. i/o/xo^eo-ta and TroAtreta. The inevitability of 
o-racris in a false TroAtreta, with the wrong sort of laws, is explained 
below at 715 a b. 

e 3. With Aeyet Srj Kal vvv ovro? 6 Aoyo?, dXtjOeia xpfjjiiivos 
begins the practical application of the pivdos. The moral is : (1) 
that the only possible ruler of a community is the Deity, and (2) 
that law, the modern substitute for the Sai/xores of the Golden 
Age, is also of divine origin. — Julian has (krwv . . . a/o^ei, and, 
in e 6, dvaxj/v^cs. 

714 ^ 1- "^^^ ''"^^ ^°^ Stavoprjv €7rovop,d^ovTa<s vopcov : whereas, 
of old, obedience was paid to the Deity in the person of his 
ministers, the Sat^oves, it is now due to the '''•immortal" i.e. the 
divine in us, and that is the intellect, represented in the person of 

441 



714 a 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

its ministers. These ministers we may call not Sat/xovas but 
vov SiavojULOis, " the arrangements " or " appointments made by the 
intellect^" and to which we give the name of laivs. For the divinity 
of vovs cj). Bep. 501 b with Adam's note ; also Tim. 90 a where he 
calls the vovs a Satfxiov. I take rot; vov to be not an objective 
gen. denoting the thing distributed but a subjective gen. denot- 
ing the maker of the arrangement, which arrangement is the law. 
Not only is vo/xos connected with the idea of ve/xeti/, but I think 
Plato's fancy played with the verbal assonance between Saifxovas 
and 8tai/o/xa?. (It will be remembered that at Aesch. Eum. 727 
the former word got into the text by mistake for the latter.) 
vovs in its highest form — the trained philosophic intellect — is thus 
enthroned as the supreme authority in politics and law. — Cp. Cic. 
De legg. i. § 17 ; penitus ex intima philosophia hauriendam iuris dis- 
ciplinam, though Cicero's philosophy is not the same as Plato's, 
when he goes on to say (§ 18) est ratio summa insita in natura, quae 
iuhet ea quae facienda sunt, prohihetque contraria. Eadem ratio 
cum est in hominis mente conjirmata et confecta, lex est. When 
Cicero connects the Gk. vofios with vefxetv, as being so called " a 
suum cuique trihuendo" he is very possibly thinking of Plato's 
association here of hiavofx-q with v6ijlo<;, but he leaves Plato's rov 
vov out of sight — Below, at 7 1 5 c d, Plato almost in the same 
breath speaks of magistrates as being vTrrjpeTat toi<s vo/aois, and 
of their service as being ttjv twv dioyu vTrrjpeaiav, and calls special 
attention to the fact that serving the laws and serving the Gods is 
the same thing. For the fancied etymological connexion of vovs 
and vofios cp. below 957 c 6. 

a 2. avOpioiros (as contrasted with dvrjp) points the distinction 
between human and divine leadership. 

a 3. r)8ovC}v Kal €7rL$vfjLL(i)v : a hendiadys = " coveted delights." 
a 5. a-reyova-av Se ovSev : cp. Gorg. 493 b ff.. Rep. 586 b. — If 
dirX-jaTM voa-QjJLaTL had been the original text, no one could have 
thought (pace Ast) of putting in KaKw — or, as Heindorf conjectures, 
KaKwv — between the two words — as if there could be an aTrXrio-Tov 
voa-rjixa which was not KaKov ! — but if PI wrote (XTrXija-TU) KaKco 
o-vv€XofM€vrjv, it is quite conceivable that a commentator should 
remark that by KaKw he meant vocr7;/xart, and that, after the two 
words had become rivals for the place, both should be included in 
the text. Hence I feel sure that Herm. is right in rejecting 
the latter word. Stallb. well cps. Gorg. 507 e, where the same 
selfish indulgence is called dvrjvvrov kukov. (Ast doubtfully, 
and Stallb. confidently, take voa-^fxaTt to be ^^ per appositionem 

442 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 714 a 

additum " = (ji)<i voo-r^/xari. Cp. 717 c below aTrortvovTa Sai/cwr/xara 

a 6. 7roAeo)« ^ Ttvos ISiioTov : this selfish, masterful spirit, 
may l)e shown either in pi^blic or in private life. 

a 7. 6 vvvSrj iXkyo^iiv : i.e. ovk eVrt (rojTrjptas firjx<^vrj is 
another way of saying ovk eWtv KaKiov avrols ovSe ttoi/wv 
dvd(f)v^Ls — some confirmation, as Stallb. says, of the reading 
dvd(f)v^ts. 

b 3. A possible objection is here raised — Ritter suggests that it 
may well have been raised by some contemporary whom Plato is 
here confuting — that there are laws and laws, that laws are any- 
thing that states like to make them, and that law is merely an 
instrument to secure to the ruler his power and ascendancy, and 
that the sanction of law is merely its adaptability to this end. 
Those who hold this view make right and wrong depend on 
positive law, instead of judging law by a separate standard of 
right and wrong (c 3 Kal rhv <f)V(T€t . . . ovt<j)). 

b 7. TrdXiv : though the following words prove that there is 
a reference to the early part of their conversation, no doubt Plato 
was thinking of the constant recurrence in his writings of the 
great question as to the nature of right and wrong, and the 
sanction of morality, which had been introduced e.g. in much 
the same terms in Bk. I. of the Rep. — The repetition of to in 
L and before dSiKov is the mark of an inferior text. 

b 8. Trpos TToAe/zov : in other words Tr/abs dvSpetav. The 
reference to so recent a conversation is legitimately vague. — 
The reason w^hy this question is so important (Trept Se tov 
fxeyLCTTov) is that our opponents not only deny that laws have 
anything to do with virtue, but declare that what we call virtue 
is only legality — i.e. the interest of the stronger. 

C 2. Schneider's ravrr) ISdv, for the MS. ravTYji Setv, is a 
highly illuminating emendation, ravrrj is not an adverb, but a 
dat. governed by (TVfjL(f)€pov ; for ISelv in the sense of " look to," 
" make it our object," cf. Aesch. Eum. 540 K€pBos I8u)v. The 
tense perhaps signifies habit. (Cp. Goodwin, M. and T. § 159.) 
It was possibly because a pres. would seem more natural to us 
here that Schanz preferred his palaeographically more remote 
rrjpcLv for Seii/. (Stallb. is quite satisfied with the MS. Setv, and 
would supply jSXeircLv with it ; Herm. strongly supports Schneider's 
emendation, and Badham appears to have made it independently. 
Herm. cps. Soph. Aj. 1165 crTrevtrov KoiXrjv Kdirerov tlv' ISelv 
Tw8*, where ISelv means ** to provide"; as however ISelv takes 

443 



714 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the place of the preceding /SXeTrecv, the slightly different " look 
to " suits this passage better.) — We must repeat Selv with tSetv, 
" that they have got to have in view the interest of that form 
of government, and to secure its permanence and integrity." — The 
oTTCDs clause is exegetical to (Tv/x(fi€pov, and sounds the more natural 
because it might itself depend on ISelv, if necessary. It is 
repeated in another form below at d 3. 

C 3. Tov cf)var€L opov Tov SiKatov : though at b 6 to StKatov 
Kal olSlkov may have been meant to include positively enacted right 
and wrong, these words show that the larger question of right 
and wrong in the abstract, as we should say, is the main subject 
of the dfjLcl)L(rfS'JTrj(ri<s. " And they say that these words best 
define justice as it exists in nature," i.e. that outside positively 
enacted law, right and wrong do not exist. 

d 3. " Genitivus tyjs o.pXV^ ® "^oce crviJL<f>€pov pendet, ut dativus 
eavTO) pro genitivo positus sit " Ast. — tov fxkveiv^ " with a view 
to its continuance." - Cp. 876 e 3 tov /xt^ttotc f^aLveiv e^w t-j}? 
Slktjs, Gorg. 457 e 5 tov KaTa(f>av€S yevecr^at. 

d 6. ravT is taken by Wagner to mean " this course of action," 
i.e. the punishment of the law-breaker. But clearly TavT is ravra 
TCL TeOevTa, and " using the term rightful for them " is an amplifica- 
tion of m dSiKovvTa, which gives the justification of the punish- 
ment. 

d 9. It seems equally clear that here too TavT' means " these 
enactments." Ast and Stallb. take it as adverbial : the former 
translates it by ^^ propterea, idcirco" the latter says it means the same 
as ovTiii Kol TavTy. The sense which they and all other inter- 
preters appear to get out of the sentence is : " that is how it will 
always be with justice." But the Ath. could never say that, and 
it by no means agrees with what precedes and follows. What we 
want, and what he says, is : " These positive enactments will 
always claim the merit of rightfulness, and that is how they will 
do it " (i.e. by penal enforcement). — For ovtco Kal TavTy cp. 
681 d 6. — For the art. with StKatov cf. 630 d 9, 659 b 3. 

d 11. TovTo is the superior strength of the maker of these laws. 
They are made by to KpaTovv (above c 9) and superior strength was 
one of the d^iMfxaTa tov tc dp^euv Kal dp\€a-Oai of 690 a. — 
Schulthess's d^nofxaTwv is evidently right ; the MS. ddtKrjfidTiav 
is a careless misreading. 

e 3. For twv d cp. below 871 e 3 and 866 d 7. 

e 6. ifiTToSta €T€/3a €T€poia-i : a repetition of 690 d 3 Kal oti 
Tre^VKOTa tt/oos aAA^^Aa evavTiw?. The mention of d^tco/xctTa as 

444 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 7146 

possible i/xTToSia is a subtle way of discrediting the particular 
a^ia>/xa immediately referred to. 

715 3- 1 f • '<«^ ecftafxev ttov . . . (09 (fidvac, " and we said, I 
think, that Pindar would have it to be hy nature, (thus) legalizing 
extreme violence, to use his own words." The assertion made at 
690 b 8 was that Pindar said that " club-law " was " according to 
nature." From the fuller quotation at Gorg. 484 b, we can see 
that Pindar used the word ayet of the action of that " Law which 
none can gainsay " {v6ixo<s 6 Travrdiv fiacriXevs). Probably it 
means there " takes " (in the sense of " that those should take who 
have the power ") ; here Plato uses it in another sense of " takes," 
suggestive of forcible wresting of the truth. So he applies to Pindar 
himself his own words ^iKaiCiv to /^mtoTarov. — ws <f>dvaL : cp. the 
(US (fiacvea-dat in a similar position at Bep. 359 d 7 ; Goodwin, M. 
and r. § 755. " As we are told that he said." (Badham rewrites 
the passage.) 

a 4. TTorkpoLS TicTiV, " to which side " ; i.e. to those Avho hold 
that fo/xos depends on force, and act on this belief, or to those 
who believe in Tr)v tov vofxov ckovtoh/ dp\r]v dXK ov fSiaiov 
7r€(f>vKviav 690 c 3, As the Athenian puts it towards the end of 
his next speech, the two classes are (1) those who hold that men 
are above laws, and (2) those who hold that laws are above men. 

a 8 ff. " Where office is a thing to fight for, the winners get 
the government so absolutely in their own hands as not to leave a 
scrap of power with the losers, in this generation or the next ; 
and moreover" (re . . . 8c, cp. 649 b 5) "both sides watch each 
other constantly, to make sure that no man shall come to power 
who will raise a hand against them to avenge former wrongs. 
What I say is, that is not a polity, and no laws are proper laws 
which are not made in the interest of the whole community. 
When laws are made in the interest of part of the populace, I 
call those people not citizens but schismatics, and I call their 
claim to have right on their side a lie." 

For the general sense of the passage cp. 875 a 5-8, and the 
eavrrj cf)iXr]v of 693 b 3. 

all. 7rapa(fivXdrTovT€<s : i.e. each party, as its turn comes. 

b 1. d(f>LK6ix€vos : the participle, as often, contains the main 
idea in the sentence. The " rising against " the party in power 
would not be serious unless a position of power had first been 
obtained. 

b 2. TavTtt?, " such combinations." 

b 4. krk6y](Tav, like €cr<f)€T€pLcrav at a 9, I take to be a gnomic 

445 



715 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

aor. — For ocrot jxr] o-vfMTrdcrrj^ ktA. cp. Rep. 420 b ov fjLYjv Trpos 
TOVTO /^AcTTovTes Trjv ttoXlv OLKt^ofxei'^ oTTios €V TL rj/JLtv Wvo<s ecrraL 
8ia(f>€povT(i)<i evSai/JLOv, dkX.' oVws on fidXicTTa oXrj rj ttoXis. 

b 5. I do not see that anything is gained by the Aldine 
crracriwreta? and TroAireta? for the MS. o-Taatwra? and TroAtVas. 
— Cp. 832 c 2 rovT(DV yap 8rj TroAtreia /xev ovSefxta, orTacrtwTeiat 
Se Tratrat Xeyocvr' dv opOoTara. — Whether, with Aid., we take 
TovTovs to refer to v6fjLov<i, or, with the MSS., to rtvwv, there is 
something of a Trapd irpocr^oKiav about the sentence. Again, 
whether tovtidv in b 6 be taken to refer to vo/xot or not, at all 
events (ftacnv mnst have a personal subject, and that with any 
reading will have to be got out of Ttvayv. Besides, I do not think 
TOVTOVS in b 5 would have been put in at all unless it were to 
call attention to the change in the object of the verb, and show 
that the speaker is now talking of the tlv(x)v, not of the vo/xovs. 

b 7. T>y a-fj TToAet is a genitival dat. 

c 1. laxyy ktX.. : the usual explanatory asyndeton. 

C 2. Tots Tedeia-L vo/xols : it is significant that in the Laivs 
prominence is given to positive enactment when the author is 
speaking of the principles on which rulers are to be selected. Cp. 
Rep. 412 d €KXeKT€ov . . . tolovtovs dvSpas ol dv crKOTrov(Ttv 
rjfiLV fxaXLiTTa ^aivcuvrat irapa iravra tov ^tov, o fxev dv Ty TroAet 
rjyi^(TiiiVT at (rv/x<^e/3€iv, Tracri TrpoOv/xia Troietv', 6 8' dv ju,r^, fxr)8€VL 
T/aoTTO) Trpd^ai dv edeXetv. 

c 3. VLK^ : a reference to the ot vtK^(ravT€s at a 8 ; there is a 
victory to be won by prospective rulers ; to gain this prize they 
must excel in submissiveness to the laws. 

C 4. Trjv Twv 6e<jjv vTrrjpeo-iav : I agree with Ritter that 
Schulthess's vo/xwv (so Ast and Schanz), and Orelli's Oecr/jLoJv (so 
Wagner and Stallb.) for decJov are mistaken. There is an un- 
Pla tonic poverty of thought in such a statement as : " The man 
who obeys the laws best is to be made chief servant of the laws." 
At 762 e we are told that the highest distinction falls to the man 
who well serves the laws ws TavTrjv tois 6€ois ovcrav SovXelav. At 
V 1 3 e we were told that no city is safe under any other rule than 
the divine. Laws are the modern representatives of the 8aip.oves 
of the Golden Age : they derive their authority from the divine 
element in us ; obedience to them is therefore obedience to the 
Gods. I see nothing to invalidate this explanation in the fact 
that, immediately below, he says he has called the magistrates 
vTTTjpkTas Tot9 vo/xots. He has just explained that the two terms 
" servants of the laws " and " servants of the Gods " are 

446 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 715C 

synonymous. (Biiry would read nSivraiV for BiOiv.) — Soreoi/ 
etvai : Badham says this was put in because it was felt to be 
confusing to have to wait so long for the dwoSoTeov elvat at the 
end. No doubt ; but it is more likely that Plato put it in than 
Bdh.'s " librarius" 

C 5. Tw TO, SevTcpa KpaTovvn : a reference to the " victory " 
spoken of at c 3 ; " to him who bears the second palm," Jowett. 

C 6 ff. " But I do not now call men who are entitled rulers the 
servants of the laws because I want to say something striking : I 
believe the safety or ruin of a state depends on whether they are 
this or not." — Ritter thinks there is an indication here that the 
expression had been publicly criticized. 

d 4. Sea-TTOTrjs : Stallb. cps. Hdt. vii. 104 IXevBepot yap eovres 
ov irdvTa ckevdepoi etcrtV • eTrecrrt yap crcfn 8e(r7roT?ys vo/xo^j tov 
v7ro8€LpaLVOv(ri ttoAAw ert /xaAAov y^ ot o"Ot ere. 

d 7 flf. CL " You are right there ! You have an old man's 
penetrating vision." 

Ath. " Yes ; men are at their blindest in such matters when 
they are young, and wide awake when they are old." 

01. " Very true." 

Ath. "What next? May we not imagine the colonists 
assembled in presence before us, to hear the rest from our lips ? " 

CL " By all means." 

Ath. " ' Friends,' I would say to them, ' as has been said of 
old, God, who holds the beginning, the end, and the middle of all 
existence in his hand, through all the revolutions of nature goes 
straight to his end.' " 

(Possibly an echo from this much quoted passage was in 
Cowper's mind when he wrote : "God moves in a mysterious way, 
His wonders to perform." 

e 8. 6 7raAato§ Aoyo9 : the Scholiast on this passage says : 
TTuAatov Se Xoyov Aeyet tov 'OpcfjiKOv, 6s €(ttlv ovtos ' Zevs dp^-q, 
Zivs fJi€(T(ra, A109 8' €K iravra TcrvKxat, Zevs TrvOfx-qv yairjs re Kai 
ovpavov dcrrepoevTos. Eusebius, P.E. xiii. 12 has preserved 
another Orphic fragment to the same effect : dp)(r]v avrbs €;(a>v 
Ktti /xeiTcraTOv rjSe TeXevrrjV. 

716 a 1. The Scholiast says that evdeia (which is well 
established, as against the variant ivdilav in some of the quota- 
tions, and the early editions) means Kara StKrjv, and that ttc/oitto- 
pevofxcvos means " moving in a circle," and so alcovcios — the circle 
being a type of immortality. It is a dark saying ; no doubt 
€vdeL<f symbolically contains the notion of moral rectitude, but if 

447 



7l6a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

it is merely an alternative for Kara 8ik7]v, Plato would hardly have 
added tw Se del (Tvvkirerai Slktj ktX. 7r€pL7ropev6fX€vo<s (cp. Tim. 
33 d tf.) is probably meant to, bring before our minds the revolu- 
tions of the heavenly bodies. The apparent irreconcilability of 
the two truths is meant to have the form of a paradox, a divine 
mystery. In the Aristotelian treatise Ile/ot koct/xov 401 b this 
passage is quoted with Tropevo/xevos, but all other quotations and 
all MSS. give the comjDound verb. — For the numerous quotations 
of this passage see Stallb.'s note. — irepaiveiv is used absolutely ; its 
opposite is ovSev TrepaivovcrLV Rep. 426 a; so TrepalveL 8' ovSkv 
rj TrpoOvfXia Eur. Phoen. 589. 

a 2 ff . TW Se a€t ktA., " and Justice always goes along with Him 
and punishes those who forsake the divine law ; and any man for 
whom good fortune is in store follows Justice in close attendance, 
modest and sedate in mien ; but any man who is puffed up with 
pride — whether he be big with the sense of wealth or rank, or 
foolishly vain of youthful beauty — and kindles in his soul the flame 
of wanton wickedness, claiming to be above all rule and guidance, 
and fit to rule others instead, — such a man is abandoned by God ; 
and in this lost state he takes to himself yet other abandoned men, 
and with mad antics sets himself to work a general havoc. Many 
men make a hero of him, but before long Justice visits him with a 
full retribution, and he involves in his own downfall the utter 
ruin of his house and country." — tw Se . . . Tt/xw/aos : Stallb. 
shows by many quotations from ancient commentators that Plato 
is still following the Orphic line of thought as expressed e.g. in 
TrdpeSpos yap 6 v6jxo<i tov Aios, and rj Slkt] ecrTtv OTraSbs tov Aco?. 

a 3. ^s . . . €;(o/Aevos (Tvv€7r€TaL : the repetition of the word 
(Tvv€7r€TaL suggests the thought that the company of Justice means 
the company of God, whereas he who abandons Justice KaTa- 
AetVeTat eprjfjbos Oeov (b 1). 

a 4. Because Eusebius has no Kat before K€Koo-/u7;/xei/os, and 
because in A Kat KeKoa-fxrjfxevos is written in the margin, Schanz 
regards k€k. as a gloss on Tarrctvos, and excludes it. — 6 8e tis : 
so all MSS. and some quotations. Theodoret, Cedrenus, and some 
MSS. of Eusebius have el 6e tl<s. Plutarch, De Is. et Os. p. 47 V has 
a modification rather than a quotation of the passage, which 
begins d Se Ttv€9. Boeckh, Ast, Stallb., Herm. and Schanz adopt 
€t 8e Tts. It is evident that this suits the passage ; KaraXeiTreTai 
in b 1 is the main verb, and the c^Xkyerai clause is a dependent 
one. The explanation of the MS. reading seems to be that Plato 
is archaizing here on purpose, and uses o Tt5, the Epic form of 

448 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 716 a 

o(TTL<s (cp. in Agamemnon's solemn appeal to the avengers of perjury 
at r 279 TLvvcOov on? k' kirlopKov o/JLoaa-r] — a passage which 
may well have been in Plato's mind at the time) ; so that o Se ti<s 
(as it should be written) stands for dXX' oo-rts (or octtls Se, which 
Badham would write here). — Plutarch further modifies ^Aeyerat 
into (fiXeyofievoi, which suits the rest of his passage. (H. Steph. 
altered c^Aeyerat to c^Aeyo//evos.) 

a 5. I think it is best to take 17 xp-qixacriv . . , avota as sub- 
ordinate in sense to c^apdels vtto jxeyaXavyjiaq ; they are illustra- 
tions of the various forms which /xeyaXavxia may take. 

b 2. The same idea lurks in the metaphorical a-Kipr^ that is to 
be found in the modern English slang term " a bounder." 

b 3. e8o^€v and eTrotiyo-ev are gnomic aorists. 

b 5. 7rpo9 TttVT* ovv ovTij) 8taT€Tay/x€va, " in the face then of 
this dispensation." 

b 6. 8pav rj 8iavo€L(rOaL : the answer Set SiavorjOrjvat ws 
€(r6fX€vov . . . would correspond more exactly to the question, as 
Badhatn would write it, with the r| ^ omitted, but the more inexact 
correspondence is quite Platonic. (Bdh. would also reject Set 
SiavorjOrjvai in b 9.) Schanz rejects both r/ and Stai/oeio-^at. 

b 8. Madvig (followed by Schanz) would remove the emphatic 
asyndeton by reading ort ws. This spoils the sentence ; even 
Heindorfs Sctv for Set weakens it. 

C 1 ff . fj-ta ktX., " there is only one, and it finds its only 
expression in the old saying that like will love like, — if it is itself 
within the proper bounds ; things that know no bounds love 
neither each other nor those which do. Some men say ' man is 
the measure of all things ' ; in a far truer sense it is God who 
really sets the bounds by which all things human (ij/xtv) are 
measured and judged." 

C 1. The selection of the word a/coAou^os suggests the same 
metaphor as was presented by exo/xevos o-weTrerat, and by twv 
(rvvaKoXov6r]cr6vT(Dv. Company in a journey implies unanimity. 

C 3. The addition of the words ovtl fxerp'na shows that the 
speaker is not so much adapting the old proverb as limiting its 
scope. It always has been applied freely to the association of the 
wicked (e.g. Od. xvii. 218, and Arist. N.E. ix. 3. 3) ; Plato says the 
natural liking of each other is confined, to the good. He uses for 
good the word /xer/oios, which suggests " within certain limits" and 
this suggestion helps the further deductions of his argument. — 
Whereas Aristotle (I.e.) warns us of the evil results of loving a bad 
man — i.e. the becoming like him — Plato holds that not even when 

VOL, I 449 2 G 



7l6c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

you have become like a bad man can you love him. All wicked- 
ness is represented as a/xer/oia, " extravagance " or " excess," which 
must arouse universal dislike. At Polit. 284 e, after defining the 
two criteria of size, i.e. (I) the relative, and (2) the absolute, Plato 
paraphrases to /xer/aiov by kol to tt/octtov, Kal roi/ Kaipov^ kol to 
Seov, KOL TrdvO' oTTOcra et5 to fiecrov aTrwKtV^?^ twv ecr^aTwv. 

C 4. TTOLVTMV )(^pr]fxdT(i>v fJL€Tpov : " Taugitur effatum illad 
Protagorae . . . de quo v. Cratyl. 385 e, Theaet. 152a" Stallb. 

c 6. TOLovTO) is equivalent to " the author of limitation," and 
the following toioOtov to " one who puts a limitation on his own 
conduct and behaviour." — €65 Svvafxtv otl fxaXca-Ta : so at 771 e 
oTt jxaXiCTTa . . . KaTOL to StVaTov, Rep. 458 e, Polit, 279 c KaTo. 
8vvap,iv OTL p,dXi(TTa Sid f^pdyemv. A similar redundancy occurs at 
Rep. 427 e €ts ^vvapnv irdvTL Tpoirio^ Phaedr. 257 a €ts rjfJieTepav 
Sui/a/xtP' OTt KakXiCTTr], and 273 e TrpdTTCiv to 7rdv els 8vvap,Lv. 

d 1. 6 /xei/ (ra)<f>p(jov rjp,ii)v : croxfipoa-vvq is the virtue most 
clearly to be identified with ep^/xeTpla. 

d 3. Kal aSiKo? MSS. There is no point in adding dStKos to 
the two preceding predicates, and Burnet has adopted Hitter's 
insertion of 6 before it. To make it clearer that kol 6 dSiKos and 
KOL Tot dXX' stand for the rest of the vices, I have put a comma after 
Sta^o/9os (which, as above at 679b, means "hostile"). Schanz 
rejects kol dScKos. Faehse reads kol dOeos, and Stallb. suggested 
Kal dcfiiXos for it. 

d 5. The addition of dAT^^co-TaTov signifies that Plato is not so 
much gloating over the confusion of the wrongdoers, as expressing 
delight in the grandeur and beauty of the philosophical truth, and 
the ennobling of religion above the position which it held in 
popular notions. 

d 6. Burnet rightly adopts Schanz's del for the MS. Sei, which 
Stallb. rejects and most edd. turn into Srj. 

e 2. TovTdiv TdvavTta 7r€<f>vK€v : i.e., not only is a knave's offering 
an abomination (and his selfish prayer an outrage) but it will be 
the worse for him that he has offered it. Stallb. has collected, in 
his note on the following words, many similar passages from 
ancient authors. 

717 a 1. For the to with 6p66v cp. above 714 d 9, and 630 d 9, 
659 b and 691b 11. 

a 3. Suidas, in quoting this passage (s.v. paapd Kc^aAr^), has 
evKaipoTaTOS for the MS. eyKaipoTaTos. Cp. Phaedo 78 a {ovk eWtv 
ets o Ti dv evKaipoTcpov [v.L dvayKatoTepov^ avaXicrKotTe yprip,aTa) ; 
probably in both places a 'profitable expenditure is being spoken of. 

450 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 717 a 

This meaning is perhaps more likely to attach to evKaipos than to 
IdyKatfjos. I think we should read the former. 

a 4. avTov, " which belong to it," i.e. " which would be used 
to hit it." Stallb. cps. Phaedr. 230 d ttJs efxrjs c^oSov to cfidpfxaKov 
(so too 274 e fJLvrjfxrjs t€ Kal cro(f)La<s <fidpfjiaKov)^ where the gen. 
stands for the advantage secured hy the drug. The meaning is here 
helped out by the immediately previous gen. with o-Toxd-^^a-dat. 
Ast says avrov depends (only) on e<^e(ris (the aiming at it), by 
" trajectio verborum." This is mere hocus-pocus ; standing where 
it does avToiJ must go with /SeXr]. (It is conceivable that we ought 
to supply it again with ecfiecrts, but I think it is better not to do 
so. — Badham, followed by Schanz, would read av for avrov.) 

a 5. TO IS f^eXecTi : a genitival dative. Plato is fond of such 
datives ; here there is the special reason for it that a gen. with 
e<^eo-ts commonly denotes the object aimed at. Here it means 
" the means of discharge suitable to the missiles." (Ast takes the 
dat. to be an instrumental one.) — Ta ttoV av Aeyo/xeva opdorara 
(f>€poLr av; lit. ''the called what (missiles and engines) most 
rightly would be carried?" i.e. "What shall we name as the 
weapons (most proper) to be carried ? " The principal verb is, as 
often, in the participle. — (^kpoiro continues the metaphor of fikXrj. 
— Tct, which, in idea, includes €<^eo-i9 as well as f^^Xrj^ does not go 
closely with Troia, which is predicate to Aeyo/xeva. As, e.g., at 
Polit. 282 e 5 we have Xeyofiev eivat KctTay/xa t6 in the sense of 
" we use the term Karay/xa to denote . . .," so here Xeyofieva, 
which is equal in effect to Xcyoi/xev av, means " what names shall 
we give to . . . ? " Schanz's <^ep6/x€va for Xeyofxeva, which 
simplifies the sentence, impoverishes it, and lays too much stress 
on the metaphorical (f>€poLTo. — The same objection holds against 
Richards's yty vo/xeva and Bury's Tcivo/xeva, for Xeyofxeva. — opOorara 
goes with <f)€poLTo, not with Aeyd/xeva. 

a 6 flf . TT/owTov /xcv, . . . vvvSrj : this, for us, too succinct account of 
the various ritual by which the different divinities are to be 
worshipped presents many difficulties, and has been, in several 
details, variously interpreted. All editors but Schneider and 
Burnet adopt the Aldine alteration of the MS. ra Se in b 1 to 
Tois Sc. Familiarity with the phrase ot avto^ev Oeoi led to this 
change, and those who make it take tok efXTvpocrOev prjOela-iv as 
neuter and governed by avTucfxava. But the passage in Plut. De 
Is. et Os. cited by Ast and Burnet gives unmistakable support to 
the MS. reading. Plutarch says to, 8' dvTt^wva tovtmv 8aLfio(ri.v 
d7ro6t(S(i>o-tv ; both dviodev and dvTi</>a)va are sometimes fo^ncl with 

451 



717 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

gen. in the place of the commoner dat. Light is thrown on the 
subject by Porphyr. Vit. Pythag. p. 197 cited by Ast : kol rots 
IJL€V ovpavLOLS Oeois irepiTTa Ovav^ tol<s Se \dovLOi<s apria. — Ald.'s 
other change of the MS. aptcrTeta to dpia-Tepa is confirmed by 
and has been universally adopted. Further, at b 1 Burnet 
rejects to, TrepLrrd as a very natural commentator's explanation of 
TO, Tovrojv dvcoOeVj which was enough for Plutarch. With Plutarch 
the two kinds of offering are, for the higher gods to, Se^id kol 
TrepLrrd^ and for the lower — whom he wrongly calls Sai/xove?, 
instead of xdovcoi deoi — to, dvTtcfxDva tovtwv : I should like to 
see a further advance on these lines in the rejection of kol Sevrepa 
(in a 8). This seems to me just as likely to be a commentator's 
addition. It still remains a puzzle why Plajo should have so very 
markedly (Tr/jwrov /xev) put the inferior honours of the second 
class of deities in the forefront of his enumeration. It looks as 
if he were condemning a tendency to put the x^oviot Oeoi first. 

a 7. Tovs rrjv ttoXlv €)(OVTas deovs : apparently the jDatron god 
of the city, even if not one of the " Olympians," was put into the 
same class with them as far as ritual went. 

a 8. dpna [kol Sevrepa] koI dpidTepd : Ast says rt/xas in a 6 
is in apposition to these words, Stallb. that these words are in 
apposition to Ttfids. I incline to Ast's view ; dpna kt\. are the 
emphatic words : " As for the honours which, next to the Olympian 
and city-patron deities, you pay to the gods of the world below, 
you will be acting correctly if you give them the inferior honours, 
and the former the superior." (Schneider seems to make a fresh 
sentence begin with rot 5c tovtwv avtu^ev, and to treat rot Trepmd 
ktX. as its predicate. I do not think Sc^ta in Plutarch and 
dpta-repd here are used in the sense of " of good " or " evil 
omen " (Jowett), but literally, like dprta and TrepLrrd^ the 
symbolism being in both cases implied. 

b 2. Here we have another instance of the redundancy observed 
above at 716 c 7. It seems unnecessary, with Bdh. and Schanz, to 
reject efxTrpocrOev ; he says "just above" instead of " above." Cp. 
however 683 e 5, 861 a 8. 

b 3. opytd^oLT : the act. opytd^o) at Phaedr. 250 c, Laws 910 c 
(I think), and in Plutarch, Numa ch. 8, means (like reXelv) 'perform, 
celebrate {reX^r-qv, Ov(rias, 7ro/x7rds, ^o/oeias) ; at Phaedr. 252 d and 
Eur. Bacch. 415 it is used absolutely, without an object, in the 
sense given in Suidas s.v. opyeioves' opytd^cLV Se icm rd rwv dewv 
opyia reXeiv. (So too Photius and Gramm., Bek. Anecd. i. p. 
287.) Thompson on Phaedr. 252 d says " opyid^eiv $€(0 is the 

452 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 717 b 

usual construction," but I have not been able to find any instances 
of it, unless Ast's o/ayia^ot be adopted here. At b 4 tSpvfjLara 
opyia^ojxeva implies a transitive use in tbe sense of " serve " (a 
shrine), or "worship" (a statue). In late Greek (Plutarch and 
Lucian) there are two transitive uses of the word, (1) " worship " 
(a god), and (2) " initiate " (a worshipper). Schanz follows Ast in 
reading opyta^ot, but in the case of a word with such various uses 
and constructions we have no right to do this, and a middle 
opyid^eordaL with a dative of the deity honoured may well take 
rank among the rest of them. 

b 4. iiraKoXovdoL : this is the reading of all the MSS. but 
one (Bekker's v), which has eTraKoXovdelv with -01 over it. 
The earlier edd. incliJding Ast and Stallb. unwarrantably altered 
this to €7raKoXovdeL. Either the author, or a transcriber, thought 
another civ unnecessary after that with the immediately preceding 
verb ; it can hardly be an independent wish. — uvtols : it is 
hard , to say whether this is masc. or neut. — ISpvfiaTa : if avrois 
is masc. this would most naturally mean statues (as at 931 e. So 
Schneider) ; if neuter, " those observances," ISpvixara would 
mean shrines. — " Next after these deities will come the statues 
of each man's household gods " (i.e. his dead ancestors) " the 
worship of whom is to conform to the (public) regulations." Cp. 
910 c. 

b 6. The form of the sentence is changed ; instead of yoveis 
^wvT€? TLfxiiopevoL we have yovcwv TLfial ^wvrwi/. It is assumed 
that parents stand to their ojffspring in a quasi-divine relationship. 
— 0)9 difiis MSS. Ficinus in his translation begins this sentence 
" quihus fas est" and I think Hermann argues rightly that oh 
and not ws ought to stand here. It is more natural to leave out 
the €o-Tt with ^e/xts if we have ofs, than if we have ws in the 
sense of nam ; in other words Ocfxts, standing where it does, needs 
the support of a more emphatic word than u)s. 

b 8. Like the Latin antiquior, the comp. and sup. of 7rp€(r/3vs 
are used of superior obligations ; there seems to be the same kind 
of punning use of Trpecr/Svs here that there is in the case of TraAaidg 
at c 5. — vofxL^eLv 8e : Se without any clause before it to which 
it is adversative is here " moreover," as in /cat . . . Se. — It is 
easy to supply " he ought " from the preceding defits (^a-rt), 
though the ots belongs only to the previous clause. (Ast 
apparently felt that the oU ought to be carried on in thought as 
well, and therefore preferred wg.) — " He should consider, more- 
over, that all he has in his possession belongs to those who gave 

453 



717 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

him birtli and nurture, and should make his property minister 
to his parents' service to the utmost of his power, whether of 
purse or person, or mind, and thereby repay the debt of cares 
and pains which they have bestowed upon him — an expenditure 
made of old for his youthful development, which moreover the son 
repays to the old when age has brought them to need the repay- 
ment sorely." 

C 2. Both eK€tVoi9 and Kara Syva/XLV Tracrav go with vwr] pea- lav, 
not irapkx^iv. For the dat. St. cps. 631 d, 633 c, Grat. 437 c, 
Parm. 128 c. 

C 3. SevTcpa and rpira are governed by Tvapk^etv : the clause 
explains that vravra a KeKrrjTai kol e\ei includes all powers of 
body and mind, as well as external property* 

C 4. SaveLcrfxara is in apposition to eTrt/zeAeta? and ojStvas. 

C 5. TraXaiots . . . TraAatois : there seems to be an intentional 
repetition of this word : the debts are of old standing, and the 
creditors are old when they are repaid. Under these circum- 
stances the unusual and poetical TraAato? in the sense of aged (so 
at Tim. 22 b, and Symp. 182 b) does not seem out of place. — There 
is a further verbal antithesis in the conjunction TraAatas errl veocs. 
veois, I think, is neut., and refers to the acquired possessions and 
powers of which mention has just been made : " loans granted of 
old on the security of what was young." The man who has 
incurred the debt is all through spoken of in the singular. 
(Ast translates " pueris mutuos datos," Stallb. " pueris tanquani 
impensas," Wagner " wegen der Kinder erlitten," Schneider " in 
parvulis elocatas," Jowett " in the days of his infancy.") — The Se, 
which Ast and Apelt object to, seems to present no greater 
difficulty than that after vo/xt^etv in b 8, and it has much 
the same meaning here. (Objecting to this Se and the 
unusual sense of TraAaiots, Apelt conjectures StTrAao-iws for Se 
TraAatots ; but when a man has been told that his whole possessions 
must go in payment, " twice the debt " seems a limitation. A 
modern actuary would think " twice the loan " a poor return 
after thirty years.) 

C 7. Kal iax^Kevai, " and always to have had "; the addition 
of the perf. expresses the abiding effect of a transgression, even in 
word, against filial piety. 

d 1. There is a similar conceit to those noticed above in the 
use of irpea-fSvs, veos, and TraAatos, in the juxtaposition of Kovcjxsiv 
and (^apvrarri ; cp. 935 a ck Aoywv, kovc})ov Tr/oay/xaros, tpyo) 
/xicr>y re Kal 'iydpat jSapvTaraL yiyvovTai, Plutarch, quoting Plato 

454 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 717 d 

at De garr. 505 c, and De ira cohib. 456 d, and Conviv. disp. 634 f 
and De cap. ex in. ut. 90 c, mixes up tlie two passages. 

d 3 ff . Ov[jLOVfjL€voL<s . . . Sta^e/DovTws, " therefore a son should 
bow before a parent's anger, even when vented in resentful word 
or deed, and should make allowance for the special provocation 
there must be in the (mere) thought that a son should have done 
the wrong." 

d 8. jJ-'qTc vrrepaipovra . . . ert^ccrav : Herm., Schneider, the 
Ziir. edd. and Burnet, are the only edd. who have left this passage 
as it is in the MSS. — barring the alteration of yevvryras to 
yevi'r/Tas. — Stobaeus has rov eWicrfxevov oyKov : Ficinus, " con- 
suetam magnitudinem excedere " — if this was the right reading 
VTrepatpovra was used transitively in the sense of exaggerate, but it 
seems best to follow the MSS. and take vTrepaipovra intransitively 
in the sense of exceed. — The ace. part, supposes o-uif^povkcTTaTa 
dairreLv KaXXurrov k(TTi to have gone before. 

e 1. a)v/ = ToiVa)v (i.e. tcuv oyKtuv) of? (instrumental dat.) ; so at 
Prot. 361 e 2 (5v kvrvy\6.vui stands for tovtwv ots evTvy^ai/o), and 
below at 721 d 4 rt/xaJv (5v stands for rifiQtv ats. — TLdr]p.i, as at 
947 e and Menex. 242 c 2, is used in the sense of " bury." (Ficinus 
translates " quae maiores genitoribus suis struebant." — Apelt would 
read ert/xr^o-av for IrtOecrav ; the tense is against this.) (Badham, 
followed by Schanz, reads twi/ eW lct ixkvuiv oyKov, and tols yei'vrjTals 
— only he did not correct the accent of yevv^/rats. — Cod. Voss. and 
H. Steph., followed by Ast and Stallb., put in els before Toy's, 
and Ficinus's translation supports this.) Care, he says, should be 
taken that family traditions in such matters should be upheld ; 
otherwise the later members of the family would feel themselves 
slighted. 

e 2. Kar tvtavTov is a quasi-adjectival qualification of Itti- 
/AcAetas — attentions paid to them on the anniversary of their death 
— or possibly of their birth. 

e 3 f . Til Se firj irapaXeLTTCLV . . . irapexofxevov : we should * 
have expected /xrjSev instead of /jltj, but apparently Tra/aaAetVetv 
is here used, like €KA.€i7retv, intransitively, and with a participle 
agreeing with its subject ; cp. Menex. 249 b rj TroAtg Tov<i reAev- 
Trj(TavTa<i TipiQcra ovSeTTOTe tKAeiVei. 

718 a 3. vkfjLovTa — like Trape^^o/jtevov — is subordinate to irapa- 
ActVciv. " Above all honour them constantly by diligently keeping 
their memory fresh, and grudging the dead nothing of the proper 
expenditure which fortune has put it in your power to bestow." 
Badham reads to for rtp, and toijto for tovt<^, and follows Stobaeus 

455 



7i8a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

and Ast in omitting re after SaTrdvrjS. Stallb. and Schanz agree 
in the latter point. This makes a weak conclusion. What the 
MSS. say is : " Above all, never forget them, and don't grudge a 
penny you fittingly spend in their honour ; " the other is : " Above 
all show that you never forget them by spending a proper sum in 
their honour." 

a 4. Stobaeus omits the av after d^tav. 

a 6. Here ends the imaginary exhortation, and the description 
of the "armoury" of ceremonies by which the favour of all 
superior beings is to be propitiated. For the right behaviour 
towards equals and inferiors we are referred to the laws themselves. 
— The antecedent which has to be supplied to a is an adverbial 
ace. TavTa, qualifying rj 8u^o8os . . . rrjv ttoXlv . . . fxaKapiav 
. . . aTToreXet ; " as regards those things." (Schneider takes this 
ravra to be governed by Treidovcra.) d and ocra are themselves 
governed by aTroreAovi/Ta, which is subordinate to (paiSpvvdjxevov, 
which in its turn is subordinate to Koo-/xetv. 

a 7. Trpos deiov, which Ast would reject,- means, as Stallb. says, 
diviiiitus constituta ; cp. Od. ^ 207 Trpos ydp Aios ela-iv dnavTes 

^€LVOi T€ 7rTa>)(0t T€. 

a 8. KOi bfxiXias stands for a more regular kol ocras 6/xtAtas 
— " (what) relations with all of these." 

b 1. (fiaiSpvvdfxevov , . . Kocrfxetv : i.e. the fulfilment of these 
various social obligations will give his life orderliness and charm. 

b 2. Twi/ vojjiuiv avTMv rj 8l€^o8o<5 aTTOTcAet is apparently 
equivalent to ol vofxot avTol Sce^eXOovres diroTeXovcn (cp. below 
768 d 5). — Ficinus translates '■'■ legum ipsarum tradatio demon- 
strahiV This suggests to Ast that perhaps Set^et kol has fallen 
out after Su^oSos. — As Ritter says, the Treidova-a here does not 
refer to the prefaces spoken of below. This class of laws requires 
no preface. 

b 7. SoKec fxoL . . . dpx^o-Oai : I agree with Apelt (p. 8) in 
• thinking that it is too much to expect that this can mean " it 
seems to me the right thing for him ... to begin," and accept his 
suggestion that Setv has fallen out^ before S^tyfxa. — Tovnov Trkpii 
this I take to be a variety of expression for a simple gen. Cp. on 
676 c 6. 

C 1. Tot AotTTot irdvTa €ls SvvafXLV Sie^ikOovTa : it will be 
noticed that the subjects of how to behave to (1) children, (2) 
relatives, (3) friends, (4) fellow-citizens, and (5) ^€vol are all dealt 
with in this order below at 729 a-730a. It seems then that the 
best explanation of this difficult passage is to suppose it to be a 

456 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 718 c 

statement of the author's intention of dealing with these subjects, 
here (718a6ff.) postponed, later on in the general preface, before 
coming to the actual legislation about them. 

C 4. I think we ought to follow Ast in assigning this question 
to Cleinias. The Ath. has said that such a discourse must not be 
ev cr)(rjiJLaTL vofxov ; it is natural then that CI. should ask " what is 
the proper form for it ? " If with other editors we take it as a 
" rhetorical " question and put it in the Athenian's mouth, we are 
met by the difficulty- that in all other such questions as are cited by 
Stallb. — Symp. 178d, below 720 a 6, 722 d, and 723 b — the verb 
is in the first person. 

c 6 ff. " It is by no means easy to confine its delivery within the 
bounds of what you may call a single pattern ; but let us look at 
it somehow in this way, and see if we cannot get a definite notion 
about it." 

C 9. TO TTOLov refers in grammar to tl in c 7, but the Ath.'s 
following disquisition is rather an explanation of ovraycrL nva 
TpoTToVy which = ovTioat ttws. 

C 10. avTovs : Wagner says, either we must suppose avTov<i to 
refer to tovs vofxovSj and give cwei^eo-Tarov? an active sense, or 
take avTovs to be a scribe's mistake for dcnovs. He is not right, 
however, in saying that the people have not been referred to. At 
c 1 we had e/cccVots oh vofjLodeTriorec, and twv v6fxo)v only came two 
lines later. That evireLdys should be act. is very unlikely, as it has 
recently (7 1 5 c 2) occurred in a passive sense. — acrrovs makes good 
sense, but it would want an article before it. 

ell. TovTo TTOietv, "to produce this result"; i.e. "to incline 
them," or perhaps " to persuade them towards virtue." 

d2. Ta . . . 8rj X€.\6kvra : not, I think, (as the Scholiast) "the 
speech just delivered" — i.e. that beginning at 715 e 7 — but "just 
what I mentioned" — i.e. at 718 b 5. — eSo^ev is a "conversational" 
aorist, which we should translate by a present. 

d 4. The first thing to note about this perplexing passage is 
that the vulgate XafSo/xeva^ /ActAAov 8' has no MS. authority. In 
A we have fxaXXov * * 8\ the 8' in an erasure, and in both A and 
Xa/Sofieva is given in the margin, clearly as an alternative to 
fiaWov 8\ Burnet adopts the alternative, and this gives a 
construction, though a harsh one : €is to goes wdth aKouetv, and 
there is a threefold change of " person " within the three clauses ; 
the subj. of irapacvy is (I think) 6 vofioOeTrjs, Xaftofxeva agrees with 
the antecedent to Trepl &v ; the subject to aK0i;eiv is the man to 
whom the vojJio6€Tr]<5 is speaking. 0. Apelt (p. 8) takes a similar 

457 



7i8d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

course in reading jjicraXafSovra ("getting hold of"), which he 
thinks more likely than Xaf36fx€va to have been corrupted into 
/xaAAov 8\ (This I doubt ; Aa^d/x. might very well have been 
so written in early cursive as to be read as fiaXkov — f.auofx — and 
the three letters replaced by **8' might well have been eva.) — 
"We may translate : " It seems to me, then, that just the discourse 
I spoke of would do something towards making a man listen in a 
civil and even kindly mood to the subject of the lawgiver's 
exhortations," i.e. the actual enactments, " as they would fall on a 
mind not altogether unprepared." (Madvig, followed by Schanz, 
writes (hfifj ^v\y, /xakkov 8\ Badham XajSofieva /zaAAov 8e 
Trpaetas, rj/xepiOTepov re a/>ta Trotetv, Stallb. would insert irepaiveiv 
(to go with €ts to) after Trapaivy, Ritter contents himself with 
altering to in d 3 to ra.) — wcrTe ktA., " in fact it will be a very 
welcome result, if he brings his audience, by making them, as I 
say, more kindly, into a more docile frame of mind, however 
little he may do in that direction." 

d 5. Vermehren is doubtless right in reading (fnf^fil for the MS. 
(f>r]G-l : the repetition of ev/xevea-repov is marked, and OTrep (^-qai is 
very otiose. 

d 6. Badham's iravv for the MS. Trav is right here, I think 
(the case at 801 b 10 is different). — Cp. 723 a 4 8ia ttjv ev/xevetav 
ev/xadecTTepov ; in both places it is implied that goodmll towards 
instruction conduces to receptivity, and should precede it. It 
is just this inclination which the following words describe as 
wanting. The reason is that heaven has ordained that the " first 
step " in the road to virtue shall be a hard one. Hence the 
special need that the benefits to follow on this step should be 
clearly set forth. 

e 2. Both at RejJ. 364 cd, where the passage (Hes. Op. et D. 
287 ff.) is quoted, and here, there are variants from our text of 
Hesiod. For oXiyrj plv oSo's Plato has at Rep. 364 Aetr; pXv 686s., 
and here 17 oSos Acta, a great improvement, as oXiyrj only says the 
same things as the following words — which are here paraphrased 
by /xaAa fBpa^ela ovcra. So too is LK-qac for LK-qTat, of which the 
subject is not clear. Even the cfiepetv (for TreAetv) in v. 292, in the 
sense of " (easy) to endure," may be correct. The two last variants 
are not supported, as Xetrj is, by the quotation at Xen. Mem. ii. 1. 
20. It was a favourite passage with Plato ; cp Prot. 340 d and 
Phaedr. 272 c. 

719 a 5. avTo MSS. ; for this Bdh, proposed av (and so Schanz). 
O. Apelt (p. 9) thinks it more likely that av should have become 

458 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 719 a 

avTo if TiOivat followed it ratlier than Oelrac, especially as rldet 
immediately follows. But I think Burnet is right in leaving 
avTo unaltered, tovto would be quite regular : avro is slightly 
anacoluthic ; it implies a causal force in the preceding clause, 
something like "since this is the effect which the previous 
argument has produced upon me, I should like to lay it before 
you." av is certainly not wanted. 

b 4. Because the first hand of A has not fx€v (before Srj) Schanz 
omits it ; L and both have it. — afXLKpM . . . irpoa-Oev : i.e. 656 c. 

b 6. 7roi€tv in the technical sense of, " utter as poetry " ; L and 
have Aeyetv for it. — ov yap av elSeuv : Ast would remove the 
av ; either, he says, we ought to have ctSevat, or — on being 
supplied in thought — elSeUv. But this very passage shows us 
that there is a third alternative : as in ws . . . Set, we may have 
the tense used by the original speaker ; here this was ovk av 
elSeuv, " they would not he likely to know " ; ov yap elSevai or ov 
yap elSelev would be " because they did not know." — tl ttot' 
evavTLOv tois vofxots av Xeyovres : here the part. Aeyovres is the 
more important verb, " for they would have no idea what of their 
utterances would be against the law and do harm to the state." 
This is better than to make tl ttot' go with f^Xdirrouv av. It 
is the ignorance of the nature of their own utterances, rather than 
the ignorance of their effect, which makes the poets dangerous. 

b 9 ff . It is a rich piece of Platonic humour which gives the 
much decried and dangerous poet the task of teaching the vojxoOirrjs 
his duty. "We poor poets," he is made to say, "have to suit 
our words to the chance ideas of our characters ; you lawgivers 
have to be quite sure what is right, and why : if you are not, you 
have no right to dictate to others." — All through this speech the 
Ath. is speaking on behalf of the poets {vTrep tmv ttolyjtwv), and 
at times he assumes the person of a poet ; so at c 1 avrwv rjfMiov 
means "by us poets ourselves," and at d 7 eyw means "I, the 
poet." — The poet, as the master of the way of saying things, is the 
natural adviser of the lawgiver in the matter of the wise and 
conciliatory representation of his laws to the minds of his subjects. 
Plato shows by his frequent quotations from poets how much he 
values their power of expression. 

c 6. TTotiov : again used in the technical sense. 

d 2. 8vo Trepl €v6<s : i.e. 8vo Adyovs, in explanatory apposition to 
TOVTO. Ast rejects tovto in d 1, which Ficinus does not translate. 

d 4. vvv8i^ : the reference is to 717 d 7, where the vofjLodeTrjs 
had stipulated for a fxcTpia Ta(f)rj. 

459 



719 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 6. Trpoa-roLTTeLs used of the legislator's constant injunction, 
cTTT/vecras " timeless " (aor.) of his arguments in its support. 

d 7. el jxev yvv^rj fxoL . . . eirj^ " if one of my characters was 
a woman of great wealth." 

d 8. €v Tcp TTOLrjfxarL : this goes with etr] almost as directly as 
with StaKcAevotro. Ficinus takes it only with the following 
€TraLvoiy]Vy and so does the MS. of Stobaeus. Many wrong- 
headed alterations of TroiijfxaTL have been made, e.g. ypd/xfjiaTL 
Ast, €7ricrTT^jxaTL Winckelmann, fiv-qfjiarL Stallb., vocri]fxaTi Haupt, 
TrpocrrJKovTi fxvqfiaTi Richards, {t(j)) oiKrjfjLaTt Apelt — by editors 
who failed to see that the " poet " is speaking here of what his 
character in his poem would say. 

el. In €7raLvoLrjv the poet speaks as if it were he who expressed 
the opinions of his characters — while the following eTratvecrat, like 
SiaKeXevoLTO, fixes the responsibility on the character in his poem 
— conscious all the time that the former view is the correct one. 

e 3. Tov avTov : this may be correct — i.e. rov avrbv tu> vofxoOe- 
TT], " the same kind of tomb that you, the lawgiver, would enjoin " ; 
but I am much disposed to accept H. Richards's suggestion that 
we ought to read tocovtov here. — The MSS. and that of Stobaeus 
have eTratvecroi ; Bekker was most likely right in reading the now 
discredited form eTraivecrat (cp. 773 c 8). Bdh. proposed cTrati'otTy 
croi, which would help to explain rbi/ avrov. — uvv is evidently 
used in the sense of vvvSi]^ which Schanz suggests for it. 

e 5. I.e. as a lawgiver you have no right to use the term jxkrpiov 
unless you define it, 

e 7 ff . Having established the fact that the vofjioOeTrj<s is able to 
recommend the law by argument and persuasion, he now proceeds 
to explain the best way of doing it. This speech is very conversa- 
tional in style, but quite clear. Stallb. is right in marking a 
break, and a fresh start, after OepaTrevetv. " I ask then, is our 
dispenser of laws to put no such preface in the forefront of his 
ordinances ? Must he say straight off what has to be done or not 
done, name the penalty attached to transgression, and pass on to 
the next law without adding to his enactments a single bit of 
conciliation or persuasion ? Why, just as doctors for instance are 
in the habit of treating us, one this way, and one that, when we 
are ill (eKao-Tore) — ^just call the two styles to mind, and then we 
can appeal to the law-maker — just as children would appeal to the 
doctor to be as nice to them as possible. Give you an instance ? 
What I mean is, there are doctors and doctors^ men, who bear the 
name, you know, of doctors themselves." " They do." " And they 

460 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 7l9e 

are all so called whether they are free men, or slaves who jiick up 
their skill by listening to their masters' directions and watching 
their proceedings, learning by rote and not by principle, which is 
the way the free-born doctors themselves learn, and the way they 
teach the members of their school. You grant the existence of 
these two kinds of doctors ? " " Certainly." 

e 8. For Trpoayopemj has -evet and A^ -evot ; in -€t is 
corrected to -yj and there is a marginal note saying " all copies 
have the subjunctive " ; in <f)pd(rj and Tpkiri^Tai both A and 
have the subj., which A corrects to opt. and (in 4>P^Cv oi^ly) to 
the pres. ind. — Ast, not recognizing that the subjunctives are 
deliberative, reads opt. and puts in av. 

720 a 1. TOLs vofjLoOeTov/xevoLs : the expression rj vofjioOeTovpevr] 
TToAis at 701 d 8, and still more tovs vvv vofxoOeTovpeyovs at 857 c 6 
prove that the part, here may be masc, and denote the people for 
whom the laws are made (so Jowett), but I think Wagner is right 
in taking it to be neuter, and to mean "enactments," as at 785 a. 
The latter meaning fits in with the -rrpoa-- in irpoa-SiSt^ better than 
the former. 

b 2. I believe that all commentators and translators are in error 
in thinking that Plato admits the possibility of the empirics being 
free citizens. From Kar' kirtTa^tv to Se pi] applies solely to SovAot ; 
the previous words mean : " Yes, (we call the whole lot " doctors ") 
whether they belong to the free-citizen kind, or the slave kind " — 
then follows a description of the slave kind. This is also clear 
from b 4 and b 5, as also below at 857 c d. 

b 5. ovTiii seems to us pleonastic ; it serves to give a unity and 
emphasis to the part of the sentence containing pcpad-qKacn and 
8tSao-Kovcrt. The course of learning and teaching systematically 
(Kara <f>v(Tiv) in medical schools is opposed to the random picking 
up by their slave assistants of bits of doctors' skill. — With rovs 
avTUJV TratSas Stallb. cps. ot ^loypdcfuov iraiSes 769 b 1. Cp. Rep. 
408 b 6 Trdvv KopxI/ovs, €(f)r], Aeyets 'AcrKXrjTTLov TratSa?, " quite 
philosophic practitioners you make them out to be ! " where there 
is a slight pun, as Machaon was really Asclepius's son, L. & S. 
8.V. I. 3 and the biblical phrase " the sons of the prophets." 

C 2. Kttt : we should say " or." 

C 3, 4. Schanz says one cKaa-Tov must go. But if the second be 
omitted the sentence runs awkwardly : if the fii-st was not originally 
there, who would think of putting it in ? kKacrrov twi' olkct^v 
bears a very relevant sense. The slaves were not treated as 
individuals, but in the lump. 

461 



720 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 5. ov8' aTToSex^Tac : i.e. he would cut his patient very short 
if he showed a disposition to explain his case or to ask for an 
explanation. 

c7. I cannot but think that Plato wrote av6d8r]<s here, and 
that some early scribe wrote -w? because he had so recently had 
three consecutive words ending in -co?. If the MS. text be 
retained, it might be as well to put a comma after Tvpavvos, to 
show that av^aSws goes with Tr/aocrra^as. " He writes him a 
second-hand prescription, with a cock-sure air, issuing his orders 
like a tyrant whose will is law, and then rushes off to the next 
slave-patient." (av6a8u)^ will hardly bear the meaning "with 
the absolute air of a tyrant " ; Jowett takes avO. with otxerat — 
" rushes off with equal assurance.") 

C 8. /cat paG-T(ovY}v ktA., " and by so doing lightens his master's 
professional labours " — i.e. by relieving him of his slave-patients. 
(Jowett unaccountably translates : " and so relieves the master of 
the house of the care of his invalid slaves.") 

d 1. (OS €7rt TO irXeiCTTOv leaves it open to us to suppose that a 
physician now and then treated the case of a slave. 

d 3. e^erd^iov dir d.p)(7J<i /cat Kara <^v<tlv : terms which suggest 
a philosophical, systematic investigation ; for the latter cp. above 
b 4. — TO) KdjxvovTi KOLVovfi€vos ktX., " taking the patient, and his 
friends as well, into his confidence." 

d 5. Tcov vocrovvTiDv : a curious change of number. 

d 6. €7reTa^ev : gnomic aor. 

d 7. For fxeTOL " by the help of" cp. Rep. 560 d vttc pop trover i . . . 
fxerd 7ro\X(jjv kol avox^eAtoi/ eTTiOvfMLOJVy and cp. Theaet. 180 c 8 and 
above 710 d 7, 738 d 7, 791 a 7. 

e 1. aTTOTcAetv seems by all interpreters to have been taken 
absolutely, in the sense of " make (him) whole," or " complete (the 
cure)." I do not believe this use to have been possible. The 
analogy of 767 a 9 yTrep dv Kpivoiv rrjv Slktjv diroTeXy suggests 
that dTToreXeiv could be used with a participle in the sense of 
^^ finish doing, succeed in doing " ; I would therefore remove the 
comma which all texts insert before aTroTcXeiv — "does his best to 
restore him to complete health " — lit. " to succeed in bringing 
him to health." 

e 2 f. T€ . . . Kol yvfxvaa-rrjs y v/xva^wv : the suggestion of 
another analogy, which the reader is left to work out for himself. 

e 3. Sixfj . . . a7re/oyafdyu,evo9 ; " (would you prefer that he 
should) perform his one function in two methods, or confine himself 
to the worse method of the two, and make his patient hate him ? " 

462 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 720e 

ellff. tt/a' ov . . . rd^ea-Lv ; Badham, in rewriting this 
sentence — from rrjv to rd^ea-LV — changes half the words and puts 
in two fresh ones. Ritter also would rewrite it, though less 
drastically ; leaving us the alternative of keeping the MS. text, 
if we will supply, in thought, ra^tv with Tijv. None of these 
courses are necessary if we recognize (1) that TrpMrrjv is not the 
attribute of dp)(i^v, but, like the Trpwrov in the previous sentence, 
the irpuiTOL below at a 6, and the Trpwrov at a 9, is predicative, and 
goes with the verb ; and (2) that irept c. gen. is, as Ast says on 
676 c 6, " genitivi circumlocutio." "Will it not be natural that he 
should first regulate by his ordinances the first stage of production 
in civic communities ?" — rrjv we pi yevctrews dp)(rjv irpuiT'qv ttoAccov 
irkpL is expressed in the next speech of the Ath. as dp\y] Tijiv 
yevecrcwr irdcrais TroXecri — the dat. being another " circumlocution " 
for the gen. 

721 a 6. " We may conclude then that in every state, if it is 
to be well regulated, legislation should begin with the subject of 
marriage." 

b 1. rpiaKovra : the chief point emphasized in the specimen 
preface which follows at b 6 is the necessity that by thirty-five every 
man should have taken to himself a wife. Where the marriage- 
law occurs in its place among the other laws (772 eff.), the chief 
point dwelt on in the preface is the need of circumspection, on the 
part of the man, in choosing the family to which he is to ally 
himself. In neither case is any fear expressed that marriage may 
take place too early. Thus it will not be felt to be a very 
important inconsistency that, although here, and at 785 b, he 
names 30 as the earliest age at w^hich a man should marry, at 
772 e he would allow a young man to begin to consider the question 
at 25. There is a similar inconsistency between Rep. 460 e, 
where the time when a woman's child-bearing is to begin is fixed 
at 20, and Laws 785 b, where he allows a girl to be married as 
early as 16. — Thirty was the usual age for a man to marry 
according to Greek ideas, though Aristotle advised him to wait till 
37 {Pol. 1335 a 29). 

b 3. The reading in the text is that of L and ; A has rrjSe 
Koi rrjSe ; Ast read TrjSe 8e Kal rySe, Heindorf, followed by 
Schanz, ttj 8c Kal rfj. This last may seem to us more natural, 
but the very peculiarity of L and O's reading marks it as genuine. 
It was likely to be corrected, and is quite unlike a correction of 
anything else. 

b 8. Schanz holds that (jiva-ei nvi is spurious, being originally 

463 



721 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

a commentator's explanation of eo-rtv y ; but the two phrases do 
not mean the same thing : " There is a sense in which mankind 
is by nature partaker of immortality," i.e. " Mankind enjoys by 
its nature a kind of immortality." 

C 1. TTcco-av, " of every kind," a not unusual use of Tras ; cp. 
723 d 1. — The kind spoken of in the Phaedo is for the time left 
out of sight. One of the kinds of this desire is, he goes on to 
say, the wish to know that one's name will not be unheard after 
one's death. A desire for fame is thus seen to be a kind of desire 
for immortality. A further motive is adduced at 773 e (where 
the thought of this passage recurs), i.e. the individual's part in 
the service of heaven does not lapse, if he leaves children to 
represent him. 

C 2. yevos ovv dvOpatTTiov : Plato speaks of mankind as if the 
race had a sort of collective consciousness of the possibilities open 
to it, and as if it had what in an individual we should call an 
instinctive desire to prolong its existence. There is a sense in 
which every parent of a living child shares in the race's im- 
mortality. Cp. Symp. 206 c 6 and e 8, 207 d 1, 208 b 5, Aristotle, 
De anima 415 a 26 ff. 

C 3. T6 crvjJi(f)V€s Tov TravThs xpovov : a marvellous phrase, in 
which the unusual gen. suggests a specially close relationship 
between time and the human race ; some such a relationship we 
may fancy to have been in Plato's mind as that between space 
and the material world unfolded in the Timaeus. — Cp. also Tim. 
37d-38b, where Time is called "a moving image of eternity 
that abides in unity." 

c 6. y€V€(T€L : an instrumental dat. Reproduction is the means 
by the help of which the race secures the blessing of immortality. 
(Schneider's "ortu" is insufficient.) — ''So the race of man is 
time's coeval twin, bound to it in a fellowship which will never 
be dissolved. The fashion of mankind's lasting is this : it attains 
to immortality by a reproduction of itself; for, as generation 
succeeds to generation, the race is one and the same throughout 
the ages. From this succession it is impious for any man to cut 
himself off, and that is what that man deliberately does who 
neglects to surround himself with wife and children." 

d 4. A good instance of Kal . . . Se, " and besides," " and 
moreover." A omitted the Kat at first writing, L and O have it. 
d 5. €v rrj TToAet, " in public." 

d 8. avTov<5 : i.e. laws (in general). — ovtw is explained by the 
following Sta ro TreiOetv ktA. 

464 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 721 e 

el. TO (TfjLiKpoTaTov, " at the very least," qualifies SlttXovs. 
Ast and Stallb., by putting a comma after ytyveu-dai, obscure the 
fact that Tw fii^Kei also goes with StirXovs. (Schanz would reject 
Ti^ /xr;K€t TO (TfxLKpoTaTov, and others would emend it.) The 
added rots fi-qKecTiv rounds oflF the sentence and helps to show how 
Toj fiTjKei is to be taken. 

e 5. ypafxixara is here used in the sense of statutes, written 
laws ; so below 823 a 1, 858 e 4, 922 a 4, Polit 302 e 10. 
e 7. fj-ot seems best taken as an ethic dative. 
722 a 1. et yiyvoLTo €Ka.T€pa : apparently " if both sorts were 
in existence," i.e. " were possible." SlSolto would seem the natural 
verb here. 

a 2. All the early MSS. wrote cpoifxrjv for alpoifJLr]v. — ov fxrjv 
dkkd ktA. : i.e. " after all, what is important is that Cleinias 
here should approve of the legislation now produced ; for it is 
his city that is now contemplating the task of putting such laws 
into practice." 

a 4. Tois roiovTOL<s v6p.0Ls, " such laws as we make" not " such 
laws as you have described as preferable." — I cannot help thinking 
thai vo/xois ought not to be in the text. It is not " laws of such a 
kind " that the new Colony was thinking of profiting by, but merely 
laws of some kind or other. This Megillus would naturally denote 
by TOtovTots, i.e. yeypafifievoi's, re^e/xcvois vofiocs, " legislation." 
Some commentator perhaps put in vo/xots at the side to explain 
ToiouToi?, and it got into the text by mistake. 

a 6. These words, I think, not only convey Cleinias's thanks, 
but his approval of Megillus's choice of the longer form of law. 
" i'^ou are right, Megillus, and I thank you." Cp, 723 c 1 KaXws 
.. . . SoKCts /xot TO ye toctovtov Xeyeiv. 

a 7. y papLp^oLTCDv : not, as Ast, Lex., in the same sense as above 
at e 5, but simply in that of " written matter." It is " too foolish " 
to "take account of" the mere length of a law — ** length," says 
the parenthesis, "is in itself neither a vice nor. a virtue." 

b 1. Tot 8* ktX. : this Se corresponds to the /xev in a 7. rd 
here, though not in the previous parenthesis, should, I think, 
have ypdfji/xaTa supplied in thought. The written matter of the 
longer of the two kinds of laws, which was to be " at least twice 
as long" as the shorter one, is of more than twice its practical 
utility. In fact the case is analogous to that of the two kinds of 
physician above mentioned. In that case the superiority of the 
better one was "great" (720 e 6). 

b 2. Sidcfiopa els dperrjv tqs xP^^^'^ (^P* ^^^ ^ ^ Tvpos dperrjv 
VOL. I 465 2 H 



722 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

crwTT^pta?), lit. {pace Kitter) " superior in the matter of the excellence 
of their usefulness." Gp. Gorg. 480 a 1 tls r] /xeydXrj XP^^^ ^^'^^ 
Trj<s p'qropLKrjs ; (Ritter says it means : " the one class exceeds in 
excellence by more than twice the usefulness of the other class" — 
a very roundabout way of saying that one class was more than 
three times as useful as the other.) 

b 4. Trpos TovTo 8e, " yet in the face of this," " yet for all this " ; 
so L and 0. irpos tovtw, the reading of A and the margin of 
L and 0, is out of place ; what follows is in no sense an additional 
point. 

b 5. €^ov : the participle contains the main idea of the 
sentence. It does not seem ever to have occurred to any of the 
lawgivers that, all the time during which they have been em- 
ploying nothing but force, there was another course open to them ; 
i.e. " as far as the uneducated state of the masses would permit," 
they might use persuasion. (Wagner must be wrong in taking the 
KaO' ocTov clause with what follows.) 

C 1. I am inclined to adopt Ast's emendation of dvdyKrjv for 
the MS. P'd.yr]v ', if the initial a were faint, p might easily be 
read as /x, and ayK be read as a\. The only defence of the 
MS. reading that seems possible is the assumption that iriidol 
Kepavvvvres pd^rfv is a poetical quotation. Bdh. and Stallb. 
suggest dp)(rjv, and this Schanz adopts. 

C 6. vvv : I do not feel sure about Schanz's alteration 
of the MS. vvv to vvvSyj. The following 8i- may well have 
helped a -8r) to disappear, but vvv is not out of place. The 
reference is not to any recent part of the discussion about laws, but 
to the whole discussion. In English we should say " to-day," or 
"on the present occasion," not "just now" in such a case. Cp. 
below e 4 ly vvv SiaTpi/Srj yeyovvta. — Kara Oeov riva : Poison (on 
Eur. LA. 411, Adversaria p. 251) pointed out that deiov rtv and 
not ^€os TLS was usual in tragedy, but it is not so in Plato. For 
the phrase Kara deov cp. above 682 e 10, where it is also used 
of a felicitous turn of the conversation. 

c 7. yeyovos is not (as Jowett) " which comes into my mind," 
but " which has been brought out,— emerged." The three old 
men have talked through four books before making any laws. 
This means (e 5) that, before making a law, we must be clear 
about the principles on which it is to be made. The further 
analogy of musical vopoL, which has been before us already, 
suggests that some science (evrexvov d 5) must go to the fitting of 
the prelude to the piece proper. The style and tone of the prelude 

466 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 722 c 

to one law is as ditferent from that to another as the two styles of 
the two physicians described above. — cr;(e8ov yap . . . ap\ecr6ai, 
" since the time when we began our discussion about laws, 
dawn has passed to noon, and here we are in this delightful 
resting-place, (still) uninterruptedly (ovSev aXX' rj) discussing laws, 
and yet it is only just now, I believe, that we have begun to mention 
any laws." 

C 8. €^ iiodivov is not, as Stallb. says, epexegetic of €^ ocrov ; 
it is literally " from (being) early morning (it has turned to 
noon)." 

c 9. ovSev dXX.' -q : Schanz says A has aAA'. Even e.g. at 
Phaedo 76 a 6, and Soph. 226 a 1, where most editors read 
aAA' ^, Burnet reads akk' t^. 

d 3. If, Avith Ast, we were to transpose iravroiv and koIj it 
would make the construction much more straightforward, but it 
would leave out of sight the fact that Aoyot, like TrotTy/xara, are of 
various kinds — epideictic, forensic, etc. We may repeat the 
iravTwv in thought before ocrcov. 

d 4. (T\€^ov olov TIV6S avaKtvi^crets : Stallb. thinks that these 
words mean "what you may call stirrings-up of the audience," but 
the ofov points to a more special metaphor and it is better, with 
Ast and L. & S., to translate "a kind of preliminary sparring" 
(a metaphor from pugilistic encounters). The point about the 
TrpootfXLa on which Plato enlarges here is that they are designed to 
bring the audience into the required frame of mind, and so secure 
a welcome for the law which is to follow ; and he says this de- 
finitely in the following words ixovcrai kt\. 

d 5. ^x^^*^"' • • • T€/)aiV€cr^ai, " bringing to bear a systematic 
method of procedure, auxiliary to the ensuing performance." 
€VT€Xvov €7rtx- - lit. " & Way of setting to work according to the 
rules of the art." — Adam on Rep. 532 a 3 notes that Trepaiveiv is 
the regular word for " to perform," specially of music. Here it is 
used of other "performances" as well. 

d 6. The analogy is here extended from Aoyot and Troi-qfiara 
to the realm of music, and again, as above at 700 b (and below at 
799 e) Plato takes advantage of the musical use of the word vofioi 
to illustrate his point. Cp. Ar. Rhet. 1414 b 19 ottc/o h irot-qcret 
TrpoAoyos Kol kv avXTjcret tvpoavXtov. The whole chapter is 
illustrative of our present passage. 

d 7. Trda-q^ /ioixri^s, " all kinds of musical compositions " — i.e. 
not vofioL only. 

e 2. oiV c?7r€ Ti . . . <^t3s, " has either named such a thing as 

467 



722 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

a wpootixLov, or taken the trouble to compose and produce one." 
(TvvOerrjs implies careful composition. For e^rjveyKev els to <^ws 
see below on 781 a 1. 

e 4. 07 vvv SiaTpi/Sr) . . . o-qixaivei : see above on c 6 f, 

e 5. At e 3 Cod. Voss. has 6v for oVtos and so Bdh. conjectured 
here. The construction of ws oVto? is, as Ast says, precisely 
similar to that noticed on 624 a 7. The adoption of this con- 
struction heightens the force of the contradiction of ws ovk ovtos 
cf)vcr€L at e 3. — Bdh. would reject ye and Schanz follows him. 

e 6. With elvac we must supply Sokovctl from ws e/xol SoKei at 
e 4. — OVK . . . SnrXoL : i.e. it is not the same thing twice over. 

e 7. o 8rj ... TovT elvac : the asyndeton is of the explanatory 
kind. 

e 8. direLKaaOev epp'^Or] : the participle contains the more 
imj)ortant verb ; "whose pronouncement was likened '. . ." 

723 a 1. etvat still depends on the imaginary Sokovctl supplied 
at e 6. 

a 2. I'TTo TovSe : as Kitter says, this in the Laws would 
naturally mean "by that one of the two Dorians who had not 
spoken last," i.e. in this case " by Megillus." M. has nowhere called 
the Tt^ooLfiLov TretarTLKov. Perhaps the best way out of the 
difficulty is to suppose an imperfect recollection on Plato's part 
of what had been the actual terms of Megillus's declaration (at 
721 e 4 if.) of a preference for the law plus the preface. Schanz 
suspects the words. Ast w;ould take them to mean " on that 
account," propterea. — Kitter mentions the possibility of taking 
TovSe to refer to the speaker himself, as at Laches 180 d 7, but 
follows Schanz in rejecting the words. Apelt, Eis. Frog. 1901, 
suggests dirb TovSe, "henceforward." 

a 3. /xT^v is a strong 8e to the previous fxev. — Trepl Xoyovs (at 
which Eitter stumbles) is "rhetorical" ; i.e. by the rules of art it 
is as necessary for a law to have a Trpooifiiov as it is for a speech 
(of any kind) to have one. 

a 4 f . tVa . . . evfievcos . . . Si^-qrau : again the function of 
the TrpootfjiLov is insisted on. It is to produce a receptive frame 
of mind in the hearer. This is what it does in rhetoric, in poetry, 
and in music ; and we must recognize that in a law too the 
TrpooLfjLLov is not merely persuasive. It has an artistic, or stylistic 
function ; it strikes the key-note (as Aristotle says of the rhetorical 
TrpooLjxLov, at Rhet. 1414 b 25) of what is to follow. The addition 
of this "artistic" aid is the rptrov yiyvea-QaL Seov of 722 c 2. 

a 5. cTTira^iv, like eiriTayfjia, is a natural word for a doctor's 

468 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 723 a 

prescription, which corresponds to the law proper. ^ The neuter 
o is quite natural here ; there is no need for Bdh.'s ov. 

a 6. KaT€(f)dvr} and elirev are not gnomic aorists, but refer to 
the model Trpooi/xtov given at 721 b ff. It is possible though that 
KaT€(f)dvrf is used colloquially of a discovery recently made : "I 
see that ..." Cp. 718 d 2 and opw at 722 c 3, and c 6. 

b 1. Aoyo? is here, and below at c 4, used in the sense of 
*'text" or "body" of the law, as opposed to introductory 
matter. 

b 2. For the elvai with 7rpo(rayop€V€iv cp, Phil. 13 b 5 and 
Prot. 325 a 2. 

b 3 f . (US Toi/ vojxoOeTrjv . . . SLrjveyKaTrjv : in interpreting this 
difficult and awkward sentence we must start from the con- 
trasted irpb TTOLVTiov Twv vofKov and KaO' eKacrrov. Apparently 
there is to be a general introduction to the body of laws as a 
whole, and separate preambles, which are to be prefixed to 
individual laws, " in which way," i.e. " in virtue of which they 
will surpass their former selves as much as the double law above 
given surpassed its former self " (i.e. the so-called simple, and double 
laws of 721 bff.). The awkwardness arises from the fact that fxr] 
afioipovs avTovs irpooLfxtiov Trotetv, which would suit both cases, 
comes after the injunction to supply a general preamble to the 
whole. This difficulty would be removed if Kal KaO' eKaa-rov had 
immediately followed xpewv ca-Ttv. But on the other hand there 
seems a fitness in putting Kad' €Kaa-Tov immediately before y 
8toi(Tov(rLv cavTwi/. A revision on the part of the author would 
doubtless have removed the awkwardness, but not as Stallb. 
suggests, by substituting Trpooifxia TrapaTiOkvai for ix-q dp,, avr. 

IT p. TTOLetV. 

b 7. With TO y' €p6v for eyw cp. rd vperepa for vpeU at 
643 a 2, and to rjp^repov for rjp€i<s at 778 e 1. 

C 1. " So far, Cleinias, I think you are right, when you admit 
that all laws have preambles belonging to them, and that when 
beginning any piece of legislation one ought to put at the head 
of each law the preamble that suits the whole text of the law — 
for it is no unimportant pronouncement that is to follow, and it 
will make a great difference whether or not the laws are distinctly 
retained in the memory — still we should not be right in laying it 
down that a preface is as necessary for what we call small laws as 
for great ones. You ought not to make such a rule in the case of 
all kinds of songs or speeches either — and yet there is a natural 
preface to them all, but you need not use all the prefaces. No ; 

469 



723 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

you must leave it to the orator, or the musician, or the lawgiver, 
to deal with each case as he thinks fit." 

c 2. Cleinias may perhaps have been surprised to find his 
expression of agreement expanded into what follows, but it is 
nothing but a repetition of some points in the Ath.'s last speech. 

c 3. TrporiOevat . . . €KaarTOL<s : there is much difficulty 
here. L. & S., Schneider, and AVagner take w. t. Aoy. with 
Trpondevai, and €Kd(TroL<s with ttc^vkos (" conveniens natura singulis 
prooemium" " den fiir die einzelnen geeigneten Eingang "). This must 
be wrong. Whenever TrporidkvaL means prefix A to B, B is in 
the dat. ; besides, what sense does it make to say that when a 
man starts to legislate, he must put at the head of the whole 
body of law " the preamble that suits the separate individuals " ? 
At least we ought to have had Trpooi/xia. Clearly TrponOevat 
goes with iKctcrrot'?, and Travros . . . TrpooLfxtov means " the 
proper preamble belonging to the whole text" — koyos used as 
at b 1. — iravTos rov Xoyov suggests a long law, and this prepares 
us for the statement that in the case of slight enactments the 
preamble may be omitted. (F.H.D. would reject tov.) — Ast 
and Stallb. are doubtless right in taking dpxofJievov as agreeing 
with Tivd understood. (Jowett apparently takes it as neut. 
agreeing with Trpootfjuov.) 

C 5. (ra(f)0}S . . . pLvrjp.ovev€(Td at recalls the evfiad^cTTepov of 
a 5 ; IXV7]. (pass.) does not mean " to be recorded " (Ast, Lex.) but 
" to be remembered," 

C 6. avrd : the plural of what was just spoken of as to 
pyj0y](r6fi€vov, i.e. the laws. 

C 7. X€yop,€viov : almost " so-called." — o/xotws : the context 
(KaiTot . . . aTracTLv) shows that this word does not mean " to 
an equal extent " or " (by preambles) of equal length," but 
" equally," " invariably." 

d 1. rh TOiovTov Spav : not " to make such a rule," but " to 
do such a thing " (as to make prologues). The genitives acr/xaTo? 
and Xoyov suppose some such construction as TrpooLfiia ttoulv, for 
which this is a substitute. The anacoluthon is as harsh as that 
noticed at b 5. H. Steph. held that €7ri had fallen out before 
acr/xaros, and Ast and Stallb. agreed with him. (Cp. Riddell, 
Dig. § 17.) 

d 6. TTJs fteAAr^crews is a gen. of definition ; " let us make na 
more hesitating delay, but let us retrace our steps and start, if 
you do not mind, from those things you said above when you 
were not avowedly prologizing. Let us hope, as they say at 

470 



NOTES TO BOOK IV 723 d 

games, to liave ' better luck next time ' (with our second attempt), 
and go over the ground again, conscious that we are no longer 
arguing on chance lines, but preludizing in due form ; let us, I 
say, start on our subject with an avowed preamble." 

d 7. utt' €K€lvo)v : i.e. the speech begun at 715 e 7. 

e 1. SevTipiDV a/xetvoi/wv TrapoL/xta Aeyo/x€vr^ fxev ctti twv 
dvofxevwv €K SevTepoVj twv Trporeptov aTratcriojv ocfiOcvTCJV SrjXaSy]' 
fX€TT]KTai Se €K TOVT(DV Kttt €7ri Twv Xcyo/xeviov SevTepov TWV aUTWl/, 
OTTorav /JLt] Kara yvio/xrjv rjperepav 7rpo/3rj ra Trporepa. The 
Scholiast ignores Plato's application of the phrase to what we 
should call the " second shot " in a game. 

e 4. TO. jx€v ireptj " as regards." 

e 5. Kol TO. vvvSr] Xe\dkvTa, "just what you said above," — 
ra 8' l^yjs : i.e. finish the preface so as to include admonition on 
the subjects cognate to the religious duties enumerated above ; 
not, to finish a preface which is to stand before all the laws 
which are to be made on different subjects. The procedure 
followed in the rest of the treatise is to divide laws into chapters, 
according to subject, each chapter having a preface prefixed. The 
Ath. recalls Cleinias's request at 772 e 3. 

724 S*!' 'Tcoi' juera Biov'i '. cp. 717 b 2 /xera ^eoi)? Se rov(T^€ 
Kttt roL^ SaifiocTLV 6 ye ep.<^piiiv opyia^oLr av, rjpbionv Se /xera 

T0VT0V9. 

a 3. (OS vvv Xeyofxev refers, I think, to tKavws, not (as 
Schneider and Wagner, apparently) to the use of the term 
TrpooniidQea-Oai ; in other words, " we will all agree " to let that 
count as a sufiicient preface. 

a 4. rov roLovrov : i.e. of such a preface. — tt^os to ^ws 
ewavdycLV : used naturally of something that has been left in 
obscurity, and here the obscurity is suggested by aTroAciTro/xcvoi/. 
— irphs TO ^ws, €ts rh <^ws, els (/)ws e^eveyKeiv is used much like 
our " bring to light," in the sense of '* produce," " expose." — The 
oLov here betrays a sense that it was still a metaphor. 

a 7 flf. After religion comes the subject of education or the 
moulding of the disposition. Both the lawgiver and his " public " 
must master this subject by "ruminating on the measure and 
limits of the energy to be devoted by men to the interests of 
their souls, of their bodies, and of their property." (Cp. below 
726-732) — The TratSeta here spoken of is not only that of 
children ; cp. 730 b 6. The Kal dv€o-ea>s suggests that duty may 
often enjoin the forbearance to persevere in an effort of soul or 
body, or to press for our own interests. (Jowett's "as regards 

471 



724 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

both their occupations and amusements " is, I think, far too 
limited.) 

b 1. Kttt Ko ti/orarov, " and to their most mutual advantage " ; 
" communiterque omnium interest" Stallb. (Stallb. takes Aeyovra 
of the Ath., and tovs aKovovTas of his two hearers.) 

b 4. ovTojs emphasizes the necessity expressed in the following 
verbal adjectives — " undoubtedly." 



BOOK V 

726 1. (XKovoL Tra? ktX. : with the exception of a few lines at 
the end, the whole of this book is addressed to the same imaginary 
audience who were instructed above at 716 and 717 on the duties 
to Gods and parents. 

3. {jxera Oeovs] : below at 727 a 1 and b 4 these words are quite 
in place as a qualification of Sevrepav, but I cannot believe that 
the author put them in here. They involve the twofold absurdity 
of implying that -the Gods are (1) possessed by mankind, and (2) 
godlike. Eitter was the first to call attention to the difficulty. 
The former absurdity was lessened by Stobaeus, who substituted 
Twv ev Tw /?tw for twv avrov. He, apparently, found fj-era ^eovs 
already inserted. — oi/cetorarov 6V, " sein eigenstes Eigenthum " 
(Wagner). — Sltto. ttolvt icrrl iracTLv : an elegant variety of iravro.- 
Tracrt SiTTot €a-Tt, i.e. "all, in all cases " = " unquestionably." The 
Louvain edition has Strra ccttc TravTairacrL. — It is tempting, with 
lamblichus, to omit ovv and put merely a comma after Traa-Lv. 

727 3- !• ovras SecrTroras : an echo of Sca-iro^ovra above ; natural 
supremacy is the title to honour which ennobles both the Gods 
and our souls. — [Commas after ^vx'qv, cTro^evovs (as well as 
after Sevrcpav) make the sentence clearer. J.B.M.] — tovs tovtols 
€7rofX€vov<i : cp. 7 1 7 b 2 tt'. 

a 2. Bevrepav goes closely with /xera 6eov<i, as at b 4. — The 
object to be supplied in thought with Ti/xa is rrjv avrov "^v^^-qv. — 
For the idea cp. Tennyson's ^^Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self- 
control" (Oenone). 

a 3. delov yap dyaOov ttov ti/xt^, twv 8e KaKcov ovSev tl/xlov, 
" honour, you know, is a priceless benefit ; if a thing harms you, 
it cannot bring you honour." There are, Plato says, many ways, 
which we are all prone to take, of honouring our own souls, " as 
we think" which do it no honour at all. The only way to honour 

472 



NOTES TO BOOK V 

our souls is to make them better. Instead of which, much of the 
conduct whereby we think to honour them, does them harm. 
Apparently Plato nowhere else uses ti/xlos in an active sense, but 
I think he makes it clear by the context that it is active here. 
If we understand him to say that honour cannot be paid to any- 
thing bad — especially if we go so far as to accept Stallbaum's 
emendation Oetoiv yap dyaOwv, which accentuates that idea — 
this clashes with the statement that every honouring of the soul 
/SeXTLO) €K \€tpovos aTTc/aycx^eTai. The modest confession with 
which Plato begins at a 2, as well as much of the subsequent 
exhortation, shows that he starts with the assumption that there 
is much in every ^vx^ that needs amendment. We are not to wait 
till this imperfection is removed, to honour the soul. [St. Peter tells 
us to " honour all men." J.B.M.] Every step we take towards its 
removal is an honour paid to it. Honour then can be paid to 
something that is imperfect, and consequently bad. I agree with 
Hitter in taking dya66v to mean " something beneficial" and 
KaKov " something harmful" but I do not see that he gains any- 
thing by reading dcTeov for Oelov. The latter word, besides being 
a high commendation, adds the implication that since the Gods 
receive honour and glory, it must be a good, and therefore a 
beneficial thing. Schanz's \^vx^ ^^^ tl/jliJ seems to go still further 
from the context — ignoring, as it does, the contrast between 
dyadov and KaKov. All the above-mentioned objections also apply 
to Susemihl's suggestion to bracket dyadov as a "gloss" on delov. 
— For the active use of rifxtos cf. Aesch. Eum. 853 ovTrippewv yap 
TifMLutTepos XP^^^'^ €(TTaL TToAtTais ToicrSe, and Tifxcov i^pav in the 
next line. Plato uses aTi/xos both in the sense of bringing disgrace 
{Gorg. 527 d 1) and suffering disgrace {Gorg. 486 c 2). [F.H.D., J.B.M., 
and A.M.A. take rip^cov as passive, and incline to Stallbaum's 
OeLiov yap dyaOiov.'\ 

a 5. Xoyois rj SiopoLs r] vtt€.l^€(tlv : three headings under which 
fall the various KtfSSrjXoi Tifxai (728 d 5) enumerated below. It 
should be noticed that he does not say that words, e.g., or gifts, or 
even shirkings or compliances cannot honour the soul, but only 
such words, gifts or compliances as fail to do it good. — (1) Self- 
confidence and self-praise, and (2) self-excuse, fall under the head 
of Xoyots ; (3) self-indulgence, and (5) the preferring beauty to 
goodness, and (7) the preference of wealth to virtue, fall under the 
head of Siopots, while (4) the shrinking from toil, and (5) the 
shrinking from death fall under that of virei^ea-i. 

a 7. avTLKa, "for instance." Op. Euhnken, Tim. s.v. — Trais 

473 



727 a 



727 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

€v6v<s yevofxevos, [" a man is hardly in his teens before . . .," 
J.B.M.]. 

b 1. 7rpodvfjiovfx€vos eTTtT/oeTrei, " eagerly encourages it." 

b 2. TO 8e vvv XeyofXivoi^ ccm : a variety of ovtos o Xoyos <f)r](TL ; 
below at 746 b 4 to vvv Xeyo/ievov is j^ersonified, and is subject to 
the verb 8te£e/3;(€Tat. 

b 7. €^0LLpfj Stob., i^cLipj) MSS. Cp. Heindorf on Theaet. 162 e : 
" vulgatum k^atpui mutavi in e^atpto, velut ubique scribendum ubi 
eximendi significatum verbum hoc habet." 

C 2. Trapot Adyov tov rov vojxoOkrov koI cVatvov, " in the 
face of the lawgiver's exhortation and eulogium." — [Adyov is the 
lawgiver's speech recommending the law. J.B.M.] cTracvov/xevov? 
in c 4 again introduces in another connexion the consideration 
of the lawgiver's praise, which is a kind of TLfirj, the great agency 
for the encouragement of moral conduct. (Schanz would change 
Adyov to xj/oyov, and reject Kal eVatvov.) 

C 3. KaKwv : as at b 6, not only suffering, but damage (to the 
soul). 

C 7. Sptov Ta Toiavra crvfMTravTa : i.e. when guilty of that, or 
any other, shirking of a hard duty. "Wagner suggests <oi5> S/owv, 
applying to, roiavra crvp^Travra to the duties shirked. [J.B.M. 
suggests that the ov before tl/jlo. really belongs here.] 

d 1. TravTws, " under any circumstances," goes with aya^dv. — 
For the sense cp. Apol. 29a 7, 37b7 and 42. 

d 3. Kol ovK avTtreivet StSao-KtDV T€ Kal eAey^wv ws . . ., 
"instead of combating, the notion by convincing demonstration 
that . . ." For the time, vovs and ^vx^^ are taking opposite 
sides. Stobaeus's rjyovixevo<i in d 2 spoils the passage. 

d 5. TO. TTC/Dt TOv<s Oeovs I for the more usual ra rwv deuyv ; cp. 
above on 690 d 6. We may translate "the kingdom of the Gods 
below." 

d 7. ov^ €T€pov 7] : a variety of ovSev aAAo r/ ; elsewhere in 
Plato €T€po'^ in the sense of different is followed by a gen. 

d 8. All the later edd., except Stallb., Schneider, and the Ziir. 
edd., have a comma after elvai ; but it seems best, since the next 
sentence gives a proof of the statement contained in xj/evSo/jievos, 
to omit the comma and to take xp€v86/x€vo<s (fyrjcri closely together — 
" is wrong in saying " (" for this reckoning, which makes more of 
the body than of the soul, is a false one "). 

e 2. Burnet does well to eject the comma which most edd. have 
after dyvoel. — There is much variety among the interpretations 
given of ws : Wagner translates it by a simple that {dass)j Jowett 

474 



NOTES TO BOOK V 7276 

by " how greatly," Schneider makes it qualify davfiaorrov — " quam 
admirabilem hanc possessionem negligat." This last is nearly 
right, but does not quite reproduce the relation of the Greek 
words. I think Oav/xaa-Tov KTi^/xaros is predicative to tovtov : 
"how precious a possession this is which he so despises." The 
attraction of the pronoun denoting the soul is not unusual. — To 
arrive at Jowett's translation we should have to suppose that Plato 
wrote (US Oavfxao-ToySy and perhaps tovtov tov KTr/yaaros. 

728 a 1. r) fir) Svcrxepios i>^pg KTcofxevos : the two evil 
alternatives presented by the text as we have it are (1) the desire 
for unlawful or dishonourable gains, and (2) the absence of com- 
punction or dissatisfaction in their acquisition. If we adopt 
Badham's view that, by a slight dislocation of the text, the fx-j has 
been shifted from its proper place before ktcu/xcvos, the second 
alternative is : the dissatisfaction felt by the man who does not get 
that kind of wealth. In either case we must supply /xr) KaAcos 
with KTiofJL€vos. At first sight Badham's two alternatives seem to 
fit the argument better than the former two ; but a consideration 
of the ensuing context shows that they do not. The man who is 
dissatisfied because he is poor, could not be thought by anyone to 
be " honouring his soul by gifts." — apa answers to the ws 8rj 8ok€i of 
b 7 above. 

a 2. TravTos . . . A.€i7r€t corresponds to the ttoXXov Sec at c 1 
above. — Cp. Aesch. P.V. 961 ttoXXov ye Kal tov iravTOs eAAetVoo. 
— " He is, on the contrary, as far from it as can be." This is best 
marked, as Burnet marks it, as a parenthesis. In A iravTos (so 
and Stob.) which appears to be a correction of the first hand, was 
apparently irdvTois at first ; so too Cornariiis — by conjecture — who 
further ventured to emend AeiVet into kvirel, without knowing, 
apparently, that the same emendation had been suggested in O. 
Respect (apparently) for the original reading of A (manifestly a 
mistake) has induced Schanz, like Herm. and Wagner, to follow 
Cornarius. But Av;ret is quite out of place here. Whatever the 
after effects might be, it is assumed that the misguided soul 
delights in ill-gotten wealth at the time. There is no suggestion 
either of a grieved conscience. As in the case of the fear of death, 
the soul itself is represented as sharing in the mistake, 

a 3. TO avTrj<s Tifxiov : Schanz says A has avTTJs — as if ^v^-q^ 
and not its owner, were the subject of the sentence. As the main 
idea of the sentence is bartering and price^ I think these words 
mean " the soul's treasure " rather than " the soul's good name.^' 
[J.B.M. dissents.] — Schneider and Schanz keep A's xpvcrov instead 

475 



728 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

of the \pv(Tiov of and Stobaeus, and rightly, I think. It is not 
a question of a small ^^ piece of money" (Jowett), or small sum of 
money, but of an amount of gold, small in comparison with " all the 
gold on the earth and in the earth," of which we hear immediately. 
So, at the end of the Phaedrus, Socrates wishes for a certain 
Xpvo'ov TrXrjOos. [Clem. Al. Strom, vii. § 78, p. 879 quotes 
Xpva-ov fxiv Trdvra rhv CTrt y^? koI vtto yyjv. J.B.M.] 

a 5. What was hinted above at c 2, is here expressly set forth : 
that, for the citizen, the (ideal) lawgiver's enactment is the 
ultimate canon of morality. 

a 6. SiapcOixovfievos rdrrrj, " sets down in his list." 

a 7. It is better to suppose that kOkXyj may, under the circum- 
stances, dispense with dv — 09 av direp dv would sound awkward — 
than to read kOkXci with Peipers. Cp. 920 d 3 with Stallb.'s note. 
Of the passages cited there 873 e 3 irXy]v twv ocra . . . Spdcrrj 
is almost parallel with this. 

a 8. ovK oiSev . . . StaTideiSj " without knowing it, the man, 
whoever he be, is bringing hideous disgrace upon the majesty of 
his soul." — OVK olSev, a repetition of dyvoel at e 2, and w? 8rj 8ok€l 
at b 7 above, is below expanded and explained by ov8el<s (us eVos 
elireiv Aoyt^erat ktA. 

b 2. Xeyofxevyjv, " so-called," qualifies the word Slktjv alone — 
cp. 695 a 6 vtto tyjs Xeyofxev-qs cvSaLfxavias, and 747 c 2 tyjv 
Kakovixkviqv iravovpyLav ; so too I believe we ought to explain 
Xeyofxevyjv at Ep. 335 b 4, connecting Xeyo/jLcvr^v ovk opOios rjSovrjv. 
— What he means by " so-called " he explains below at c 2 if . 
The ordinary translation — " what is said to be the heaviest penalty 
for wrong-doing " — involves a contradiction of what follows. If it 
is generally said to be so, how is it that "no one takes it into 
account " ? 

b 6. Kara to,? (rvvov(rLas goes closely with irpocTKoXXda-OaL ; 
lit. " by way of their companionships," i.e. " in intimate com- 
munion." Schneider wrongly takes it with SnoKovra — "istorum 
sectans consuetudinem " ; and so Wagner, and (in effect) Jowett. 
An examination of the two contrasted clauses shows that d7ro(T)(^i- 
^ea-dac is balanced by irpoa-KoXXda-Oai, <j)€vy€tv by ScwKovra, 
{dyaOovs) dvSpas by roi<5 8e ; we cannot, therefore, help feeling, as 
we read, that Kara rots crvvov(ria<5 is put in to balance Xoyovs : it 
is in talk that communion mainly consists. (Hence I think Schanz 
wrong in rejecting koI XeycLV in c 1.) 

c 2 f . When we call this consequence Slkt], we give it too good 
a name, for Slkt] is the right treatment of an offender, with a view 

476 



NOTES TO BOOK V 728 c 

to his reformation — laTpLKrj ytyverai 7rovqpta<s rj SUrj Gorg. 478 d 
— in a passage where the wliole theory of what we may call official 
punishment is explained on the same lines as here. Plato feels 
that the Greek language cannot easily express what he means ; the 
nearest he can get to a had name for punishment is Tt/xwpta. 
Perhaps he chooses this because it has in it the suggestion of anger, 
which the just judge never feels. At Gorg. 525 b and at Prot. 
324 a TLfKopta is used in a neutral sense, but in both passages we 
are told that there is a right and a wrong kind of ri/xw/ota — in the 
former we read that if a man is 6pdu)<s TLixiDpovfi€vo<s it has a 
beneficial effect ; in the latter, of the man who punishes out of 
revenge for the crime, it is said Mcnrep Orjpiov aAoyiCTTWs tl/xo)- 
p€LTaL. On the other hand, at Theaet. 177 a 2, the wrong form of 
TLfXiopia is spoken of as Slkt]. 

C 3. aSiKia? dK6Xovdo<5 TrdOrj, "a painful consequence of wrong- 
doing" (Jowett). 

C 4. o re Tv^wv kol jxr) TvyxdviDV : for the remarkable conjunc- 
tion of the aor. and impf. participles in apparently the same sense 
cp. below 782 e 1 81' wv dperrj re avrots ayo/xevots 6p9(x)S kul Tovvav- 
Ttov dirof^aivei KaKws d^delcriv. — a^Ato? : at Rep. 380 b Plato 
explains that a man is never ddXio<^ as the result of duly ordained 
^LKTi : COS §€ dOXiOL fiev ol SiKrjV SiSovres, '^v Se 6 Spojv ravra ^€09, 
ovK €aT€ov Aeyetv tov TroirjTrjv ; at Gorg. 4*7 2 e o dScKwy re Kat 
6 aStKOS TravTtus fxev ddXios, ddXnoTepo<s /xcvrot lav fxr] StSw 
SiKYjv ; this TLfJuopia however does leave a man a^Atos, so it 
cannot be Slkt], — 6 fiev ovk laTpevo/jievos, o 8e, tVa- eVcpot 
TToAAot crw^wvTat, dTroXXvfjievos : the worst penalty that can 
be incurred by the wrong-doer is that he is cut off from the 
society of the good and incorporated in that of the bad and com- 
pletely assimilated to them. If he is not so cut off and so 
incorporated, he is still dOXios, for the good, among whom he still 
lives, are likely to get rid of him as an incorrigible villain ; this 
is 6 fjLY] Tvy xdviov whose fate is likely to be "destruction," as an 
example to others (cp. below 854 e 7). On the other hand 6 
Tvx<J^v is a^Aios because he does not get the only treatment that 
would cure him, which is proper punishment. (This interpretation 
of a most perplexing passage I owe to the late Prof. J. B. Mayor. 
F.H.D. also takes 6 /xrj Tvy\dvo)v to be the man who is put to 
death (diroXX-ufxevos:), but assumes the words to mean that he is 
put to death by the law for his crimes ; and that the only way a 
man can avoid the above described penalty is by disappearing from 
the world. Prof. H. Jackson, on the other hand, holds that the 

477 



728 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

arrangement is cliiastic (and so Ficinus), and that 6 fxrj rvyx^*'^^ 
(T6/xa>/3ia§) is the man who is said not to be cured " because he 
does not get the treatment he wants," — if he does not get the 
Tt/xa)/3ia, a fortiori he does not get Slkt] — and that a7roAAv/u,evos 
only means that such a man goes hopelessly to the bad, and is a 
lesson to the rest of the world.) 

C 6. -^jjLLv is a genitival dative, " our glory." [Dat. of reference, 
" in our judgement," J.B.M. and A.M.A.] 

C 7. TovT ttTJTo (l)s apifXTa aTroreAetv, " to accomplish this very 
result " (i.e. to /^cAtiw yevka-daC) " as well as we can." In short, 
man's true glory consists in choosing the good, and in doing his 
best to remedy all remediable evil. 

C 9. QVK €v(f)V€(rT€pov €LS ktX. I it is the soul's natural afl&nity 
with the Good that gives it the value as a Krrjfia claimed for it at 
726 2 and 727 e 1. This is implied in the statement just made, 
that the true glory of the soul is the pursuit of the Good, and the 
rejection of evil. 

d 3. Sevrepov : next, that is, to the Good — to TrdvTOJV apicTTOv. 
€Td\6rj may be gnomic, or may refer to the fact that the order of 
merit was given on the preceding page ; more likely the latter. 
The Aldine TLfxfj for the MS. Tt/xyy must be right (unless some 
words are lost, e.g. <r]> Tt/xr) <tov8€>). — Burnet is the first among 
modern editors to print 7ras . . . voyjcreiev as a parenthesis — like that 
at e 1 below. (There are difficulties both ways, but perhaps the 
harshness of taking tovto ye as a restatement of to rpiTov is the 
greater evil.) [J.B.M. dissents, translating "as for the third, every 
one would consider that this was etc."] 

d 4. I think it is best to take elvai to depend on vo-qcreiev ai/, 
repeated in thought ; so that in effect the sentence is equivalent 
to : " everybody will recognize that the natural (and proper) 
honour paid to the body comes third in importance." — 5' av, 
" here again." 

d 5. ocrat implies that the Kt/SSrjXoi are more numerous than 
the dX.TjOeL<; Ti/xat. 

d 6. jxyjvveLv 8-q fioL ^aivcTat : this curious phrase seems to 
mean: "as I imagine, he distinguishes them (as follows)." 
Explanatory asyndeton ; as also is the case with the sentence 
beginning Tt/xiov clvau ; but this is so regular after oSe and roiocrSe 
that it is hardly noticeable. 

e 2. Ta 6' €v Tcp /zecro) . . . fxaKpio, " but that those bodies which 
possess all these qualities " (lit. " the whole of this condition ") "to 
an extent half-way between these two extremes [" are in the 

478 



NOTES TO BOOK V 728 e 

mean, being in contact with the whole category" J.B.M.] — are the 
most self-respecting, and also the safest by far," (Against 
H. Steph.'s (rio<f)povi(TT€pa and d(T<f)ak€(TT€pa, which Schanz adopts, 
it should be noticed that there are three things compared, i.e. the 
two extremes, and the mean.) 

e 4. TO. still, I think, means the (two kinds of) bodies, not 
qualities. — For the doctrine cp. Rep. 410 c-e. [ra = " these bodily 
conditions" J.B.M.] — xavvovs^ "puffed up," "conceited." 

e 6. The second Kai connects wcravTws and t. Kara t. av. p. 
" It is the same way with the possession of money and goods, and 
it falls imder the same scale of valuation." The Tt/ir^crews 
repeats the notion of the rt/xtov of d 7. (We could have dispensed 
with this Ktti ; Cornarius and Ast actually venture to reject it.) — 
TLfxi](r€(os depends rather on pvOjxov than (as Stallb.) on the whole 
phrase k. t. av. p. €\. (Ast makes it depend on wcravroj?, Ficinus 
and Jowett [and J.B.M.] on kt-^o-is — " et census," and "and 
distinction.") 

729211. €)(^Opas Ktti o"Tacr€ts . . . rats iroXea-iv Kai ISia . 
chiasmus ; o-racrets applies to iroXecnv and €yOpa^ to the 
individual citizens ; SovAetas in the next line would apply 
equally to both, a-racris would arise between the moneyed class 
and the poor (cf. below 744 d 3 ff.) ; hatred would be felt by a very 
poor man for a very rich one. Again, both a state with no resources, 
and a man with no property, would be liable to be brought into 
subjection. Cp. Rep. 373 d. [J.B.M. contrasts Phaedo 66 c . . . 
oracrcts ovSev aX.Xo 7rap€\eL rj to crw/xa Kai at tovtov einOvixiaL.^ 
But at Phaedo 66 c he goes on 8ta ^prifxariov KTrj(rLV Travre? ol 
TToXe/jLOL ytyvovTai, ra 8k xpT/j/xara dvayKa^ofieOa KToicrOai Sua 
TO (rujfia. 

Si.2. fir) &r) TL<s : the asyndeton apes the form of a legal 
enactment. — For the selection of topics now to be treated — down 
to 730 a 9 — see the note on 718 c 1 above. 

a 4. There is the same reference to the double effect of 
gi-eat wealth — that on the state, and that on the individual — 
as at a 1. 

a 5. aKoXoLKevTo^ : i.e. so moderate as not to attract flatterers 
to its possessor ; a bold and significant expression, but hard to 
translate (? " not buzzed about"). There is a similar boldness 
shown above at 728 e 3 in the application of the adj. o-uxftpovecrTaTa 
to the moderately endowed hodieSyanid in that of the adj. pLovarLKiordr-q 
in the next line to oixria. 

a 6. /JLova-LKioTaTrj : the metaphor in this word is continued 

479 



729 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

in the o-i;/x<^(ovoucra and crvvapfjLorTova-a which follow ; the 
word means something like " harmonious." — rj/jLiv is an ethic 
dative. 

a 7. €ts ttTravra, " generally," i.e. in the case of men of all 
stations ; to be taken with the two preceding participles. [J.B.M. 
and A.M,A. take it with aXvirov.] 

b 1. atSw TToWqv, ov ^(/avcrov : this remark forms a neat 
transition to what may be regarded as a true member of the 
series now before us (see on "718 cl). We are concerned with 
objects of honour and respect ; there is a true sense, he goes on (b 6) 
to tell us, in which children, who are always being told to pay 
respect to others, are deserving of respect themselves. (The 
remarks are not made " per occasionem," as Stallb. would have 
us believe.) 

b 3. TO has a stronger demonstrative force than usual here. 
Cp. 730 c 4. — eWtv yiyvofiivov is a sententious periphrasis for 
yiyverat : " We fancy that we are going to secure this legacy to 
them by scolding them when they show a lack of it. But 
modesty is not created by the admonition which people nowadays 
address to the young, when they tell them that it is the duty of 
one who is young to show respect to everybody." 

b 5. TTctvTa : masc, (So Ritter : Schneider transl. " omnia") 
It is the obj. of alcrxyvecrdaL, not an attribute of tov veov. 

b 8. avTov : not the e/x^pw;/ vofxo6€Tr)<s, of course, but the 
elder to whom the lawgiver gives the advice. The change of 
number in such a case is not uncommon in Plato. Stallb. cps. 
Prot. 324 a. — Cp. Juv. xiv. 47, with Mayor's note. 

C 3. a/xa Kal avTMV, " simul atque ipsorum " Schneider. 

C 5. ojxoyvioiv OcMv KOiviiyviav iracrav ktA. : Ruhnken, s.v. 
6/Aoyviot OeoL, quotes from Pollux iii. 5 a description of relations 
as OiOiv ofxoyvLijJv kolvmvoI Kal ttJs avTrjs €crr las /xcto^oi. The 
following ravTov (f). at, eyovcrav obliges us to take the abstract 
noun to stand for the concrete in translation : " all the members 
who share the worship of the family gods, and who have the 
same blood in their veins " (lit. " the same natural blood "). 

C 7. Ruhnken was the first to point out that Stobaeus had in 
yeveOXiovs preserved for us the true reading for the curiously 
perverse ycvecr^at ovs of the MSS. and early editions. The 
corruption is readily explicable palaeographically. 

d 1. The subtlety of this wise counsel of humility consists in 
the selection of the man's own state of mind, and not in his 
outward expressions, as the determining cause of his popularity. 

480 



NOTES TO BOOK V 729 d 

If he really thinks his friend's services to him of more worth and 
importance than what he does for them, his behaviour to them 
cannot fail to be conciliatory and void of offence. — ev/xevcis, the 
MS. reading, has been unnecessarily altered by H. Steph., Ast, 
Bekker, and the Ziirich edd. to cvfxevh, which Stobaeus also has. 
Stallb. refers to 657 d above, and Phil. 45 e, and Schramm also 
to Rep. 563 c, passages which show that such a phrase as to ye 
cftiXoyv Kal kraipiav is regarded as quite equivalent to tovs ye 
(fyiXoVS KOI €TaLpov<s. 

d 3. ^7 'K€iVOL : sc. rjyovvTai. 

d 4. avTiov Tiov <J)lXu)v t€ KOi €TaLp(j)v : as far as grammar 
goes, this gen. might stand either for r) avrol ol c^tAot StavoovvraL 
(so Schneider and Wagner), or, by brachylogy, for 1^ rot? avrwv 
Twv (fiiXiov xapiTas (Jowett) ; but the sense of the sentence points 
to the former interpretation. A is to set a higher value on B's 
services to him than B himself sets on them, and is also to set a 
lower value on his own services to B than B sets on them. There 
is no question of a comparison of service with service. 

d 5. rov 'OXvpTTtacTLV : with tov we must supply aywvos from 
the following dywvoiv. — " In preference to the Olympian or other 
contests " is, by brachylogy, for " in preference to conquering at 
the Olympian, etc." 

d 7. 86^7) : " Ruhm " (Wagner) is nearer than opinione 
(Schneider). Plato suggests that glory may be gained by pre- 
eminence in more lines than one. — The w? v7rrjp€Tr]K(b<s . . . 
€1/ Tw jSiO), which explains So^rj v7rrjp€(TLa<5 seems a rather clumsy 
addition. Can it be due to a commentator who took 86^y to be 
merely (as Schneider) " in a reputation for " ? — It is perhaps not 
fanciful to see a link between this and the preceding recommenda- 
tion in the fact that the value of a vrr-qpea-ta is considered in both. 

e 2. aytwrara oVra, " have a special sacredness." 

e 3. Twi/ ^kviiiv : if the reading koI el<5 t. ^ev. is sound, 
although the rest of the passage dealing with ^evot treats only of 
offences committed against them^ it is better to take ^evwi/ here 
as a subjective gen. than to make it synonymous with the 
following eis tovs ^evovs. Schn., Wagn. and Jowett can hardly 
be right in translating Trai/ra ra rwv ^ei/tuv as " all that concerns 
strangers." In that case the rd would surely have to be repeated 
before afxapr-j [xara to make this clear. Besides, ra twv ^evwv, in 
this sense, is not " inseparable from heaven's vengeance." I think 
it best though to follow F.H.D. who would bracket kol €ts tovs 
^€vov<s as a marginal gloss on the objective gen. ^evwv. 

VOL.1 481 2 I 



729 6 THE LAWS OF PLATO 

e 4. Trapd goes closely with the following fiaX-Xov ; cp. 747 b 5 
irapa rrjv avrov (fivtrtv €7rt8i5ovTa. 

e 7. For jotaAAov heightening the force of a comparative cp. 
below 781 a 3, and Gorg. 487 b. Here too it repeats the sound of 
the previous TUfioypov fxaXXov. [J.B.M. takes /xaWov with 
8vv(xiJL€vo<s here and with TCfMoypov above at c 5.] 

730 a 1. o ^evtos €Kd(TT(Dv ktX. : i.e. whether it were a Saipiov 
or a Oeos who in any particular case had the ^evos under his 
protection, they were all ministers of Zevs ^evios. 

a 4. 7r/>6s TO TcAo? av. TTop. : cp. Rep. 330d4ff. — ^eviKcJov /cai 
€7r. a/x. We have the same bold use of these adjectives below at 
b 2 in ^evLKo, re kol eTn^iopia o/xtAT^juara. 

a 7. ervxev MSS., but in A there are two marks before the 
word standing for two missing letters. Badham ingeniously 
suggested that aTrervxev was the original reading. (So Schanz.) 
d7r€Tvx€v ofx. would mean, I think, not " failed to secure the 
fulfilment of a promise of safety," but simply " failed to secure " 
such a promise. This directly states the offence which brings 
down the God's vengeance, and directly explains the fate of the 
suppliant. The reading cTu^ev o/x. leaves it to be inferred that 
the promise was broken, and seems, in so far, inferior, as a direct 
representation of what happened. 

b 1. Possibly in this enumeration of the subjects just dealt 
with, TO, Trepl cavTov refers to the honouring of the soul^ and 
rd Trepl rd eavTov to the proper regard to be had to one's body, 
and one's property. Kitter holds that to, wepl kavrov includes 
the body as well as the soul. — It seems better to take the rd at 
the beginning of b 1 — which also goes with irepl ttoXlv re Kal 
(f). K. (Tvy. and with ^€VLKd re Kal cttc^. — with o/xtA^/xara, than to 
make 6/x. agree only with ^evuKd re kol Itt. Cp. above 718 a 8, where 
depaTrevp-ara went with irpbs €Ky6vovs ktA. as well as with ^evtKa, 
The position of op.iX-jp.aTa is also in favour of so taking it. 

b 3. TTOLos TLs o)v avTos '. as Ritter says, there is a want of 
clearness in the arrangement of the subject matter here. This 
passage, down to 732 d 7, might well be described as directions 
for the real honouring of the soul, and would seem to be more in 
place after the description of the kinds of false honouring of the 
soul given in 727 f or as an amplification of the tol<; dp-eivoa-Lv 
eTTccrOai in 728 c 6. The ostensible ground of the division is 
that the qualities here praised depend not on law, but on public 
opinion for their sanction. Also the virtues here to be described 
are spontaneous — not the result of external restriction. 

482 



NOTES TO BOOK V 730 b 

b 5. ocr' av . . . aTre/oya^erat MSS., ocr ovv . . . drr. Stobaeus. 
The early edd. read 6V av ovv . . . direpyd^eTat. Ast makes 
two suggestions : (1) to read oV civ aTrepyd^rjTaL, and (2) ocra . . . 
aTrc/oya^erai. Most recent edd. adopt (1), Schanz and Burnet 
rightly adopt (2). Stobaeus's ovv is doubtless due to a wish to 
remove the asyndeton, which is of the ordinary explanatory kind. 
The av of the MSS. is most likely due to the a of ocra coming 
before a /x, which might well be mistaken for a //, and, by a 
further mistake, read twice. Bitter suggests that perhaps oo-wv 
fxrj vofjios {ka-TL) was the original reading. Schmidt's 6V, dv /xr) 
v6ixo<s, which Hermann adopts, does not give the right sense at 
all. It is here pointed out that the matters now dealt.with are 
such as do not fall to the law, but to the preface — Cp. above 
728 d 6 — and av firj vo/xo? throws this idea into the background. 
— The salutary and educative force of public opinion, as directed 
by the wise lawgiver's apportionment of praise and blame, has 
been repeatedly appealed to. Cp. e.g. 727 c, 631 e. 

b 6. For evrjviovs (MSS.) the early edd. have €vvolkov<5, " mani- 
festum germanae lectionis glossema" Stallb. 

b 7. fxerd TovTO : a repetition of the cTro/zevov tovt(^ in b 4. 

C 1. dk-qdeia . . . dvBpioTTOLS : this oft-quoted utterance — 
which may well stand beside Achilles's grand words at II. ix. 
312 f. — is said to have been borrowed from the Pythagoreans. Of. 
Porphyr. Vit. Pyth. p. 41 roiavra Traprjvet, /xaAto-ra 8' aAry^€i;€tv 
TOVTO yap jxovov SvvacrOat totjs dvOpuiirovs Trotetv ^ew TrapaTrXfjcrtovs. 

c 3. €ir] : like dKovoi at 726 a 1, an independent optative of 
exhortation; cp. also 871b 4 and 917 a 1. It gives an antique 
form to the expression. Sta/?tot is opt. by attraction. Both opta- 
tives find analogies in Ar. Vesp. 1431 €p8oi tl<^ lyv cKao-Tos elSoir] 
T€\vr)v. (Ast would insert av here.) 

C 4. 6 Se : the article has a strong demonstrative force, like 
the TO at 729 b 3. "That man is untrustworthy, to whom, etc." 
The conjunction of ttio-tos and a7rto-Tos makes it read as if 6 /xev 
yap TTto-To? had preceded. 

C 5. oTO) 8e dKovcTiov ({pevSos (ficXov kcTTiv) : i.e. the man who 
does not mind (or who cannot help) being mistaken — who would 
as soon hold a false opinion as not. For the distinction between 
TO ui9 d\'q6(2<s xpGvSo'? — the lie in the mind and the spoken lie, see 
Rep. 382 a ff. Cf. also Hipp. Min. 372 ff. — dvovs, a/xa^ry?, avota, 
dfxaOia are used by Plato very much as fool and folly are used in 
our version of the Psalms and Proverbs ; there is moral as 
well as intellectual condemnation in the words. Cp. e.g. 689 a 

483 



730 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

and b, Soph. 228 d 4, \pv\rjv apa olvoyjtov al(TXP^v Kal ajxirpov 
Oereov. 

C 6. Schanz is, I think, right in adopting Hermann's re for ye. 
The same man is not supposed to have both faults, and both are 
declared to be prejudicial. 

C 8. Tracrav, "complete"; so o^otoTT^Ta . . . Traa-av at Phaedr. 
253 cl, Trdcry aTTopia at Soph. 250 d. This comes very near the 
use noticed on 637 a 3, and elsewhere, for " all kinds of." — 
KaTea-KevdcraTO : gnomic. 

d 1. (Tx^^ov oixoLO)^ : i.e. he has estranged his friends, and even 
his children — if he has any — and it is all one to him whether 
they are alive or not ; he is absolutely alone. 

d 2. Next in honour to regard for truth, as a necessary social 
characteristic, comes eagerness for public service — an active, or 
aggressive form of virtue — first as shown in combating dSiKta. 
SiKaiocrvvr] is eminently a social virtue ; but, as we read at e 1 ff., 
even aiocfipocrvvrj and (fipovrjcns have their social aspects, inasmuch 
as they can be communicated to others. 

d 4. iKetvov : we have a similar gen. after StTrAacrios below 
at 743a 6; only here it is by brachylogy for ryjs €K€lvov TLfxrjs. 
— ttoXXmv dvTa^Los ereptov : as we have seen above, this Homeric 
phrase is a favourite with Plato. Here he means that the 
righteous man multiplies the value of his own righteousness 
every time he helps to make another man righteous by checking 
him in wrongdoing. 

d 5. fx-qvycov : Stallb. quotes (from Stob. xliv. 40), from the so- 
called TrpooL/xia vofjLojv of Charondas, a similar injunction. 

d 6. a-i;y/coAa^a>i/ : this active co-operation with the magis- 
trate is the crowning development of social SLKaLocrvvr). — o fiey as 
dvTjp : for the article with a predicative adj. cp. Menex. 248 a 4 
ovTos kcrriv 6 (Tio<f)piov koI ovtos 6 dvSpeLos kol (^povLfxos-) and 
Aeschin. Ile/ot TrapaTTpea-^cias 267 koL rov KaXov crrpaTiMTrjv €/x€ 
divofiaa-ev. It has almost the force of putting the adjective into 
the superlative. Cp. below 732 a 2 tov ye jxeyav dvSpa ecrofxevov. 
Cp. St. Matthew v. 19. 

d 7. Schanz and Burnet rightly put a comma after reXetos 
(and so Stob. i. 95 ed. Meineke, but not at ix. 55). Other editors 
either put no comma, or else put one after dvayopeveu-Oco. — The 
Emperor Julian, in quoting this passage, has dperrjs. This is, no 
doubt, a possible construction, and the gen. is analogous to that 
after viKr^r-qpia <j>epeiv — e.g. at 964 b 4 — and Schanz adopts it in 
his text. At 953 d 5 we have tQ)v VLKrj(l)6pQiv rtvos err dpeTfj, and 

484 



NOTES TO BOOK V; 73O d 

Ast puts in €7r' here. But the simple dat. of all the MSS. is also 
a possible construction, on the analogy of the dat. with vlkolv — 
856 c 8 TYjv trXridii vtKwcrai/, Menex. 247 a av fxlv i/iKw/xei/ vfxas 
dpeTrj. 

e 2. K€KTT]TaL I Schauz, in his preface, expresses his belief that, 
though good MSS. vary on the point, the reduplicated form was 
never used by Plato except after a word ending in a vowel (cp. 
Lack. 192 e irkcov eKT^o-erat — so Burnet with B and W for T's 

7rA€OVe/<T7yO"€Tai). 

e 3. Svvara jxr) fxovov avrbi/ e^ctv dXXa Kal ctAAots /xeraStSoi/at, 
" which admit, not only of a man's having them himself, but of 
his imparting them to others." An extraordinary "stretch" of 
the application of Svvaros, due to the Greek preference for the 
personal rather than the impersonal construction. Cp. Eep. 521a 
ecTTL (TOL Swarr) yevecrdai TroAts ev OLKOVfxevrj^ Fhaedo 90 c Xoyov 
. . . Swarov Karavorja-at, Xen. Anah. iv. 1. 24 avro<s 8' €cf>7] 
rjyrj(T€(r6aL Swarr/v Kal vrro^vytoi<s wopevecrOai oSov. There is a 
similar stretch, and personification in our familiar " easy to read," 
"good to eat." Cp. above on 663 e 1 for a similar " pregnant " 
use of Svvaa-daL. (There is not the slightest ground for emending, 
with Schanz, to ocra . . . rts SvvaraL . . . avros ^xetv, or with 
Apelt, Eis. Prog. 1910, to change Suj/ara to Seoi/ avrd.) 

e 4 ff . rhv jx€v . . . rpcyeiv : it is easier to picture to ourselves 
the three types of men here described in the case of cf)p6v7)(ris than 
in that of (Tio(f>pocrvvr]. It is hard to imagine a man who would 
grudge to others the possession of the latter characteristic, while 
having it himself. — [J.B.M. suggests that a man who prides himself 
on his good manners, and wishes to keep them for his own set, is a 
case in point.] All this disquisition on social duty is an explana- 
tion of what was meant at 701 d 9 by saying that a community 
ought to be <f>LX.r] eavTrj. 

e 5. Ast would read edeXovra 8e Spdvy Sevrepov ; Stallb., keeping 
the MS. reading, says we ought to supply np-dv after edv. It is 
best to keep edv Sevrepov, and to translate "leave him in the 
second class"; aKpos is "first-class," cp. Polit. 292 e aKpoL 

TTiTTeVTaL. 

731 a 2. ari/xa^^etv : depreciation of the " precious jewel " 
savours of the ill-nature which makes " the toad ugly and 
venomous." 

a 3. d(f>06vio<s : the desire to rise by the detraction of others 
(a 5) not only takes away all merit from the " informer," but 
vitiates all the efforts he may make towards excellence himself. 

485 



731 a ,THE LAWS OF PLATO 

We may notice that it is implied that such a desire is likely to 
prompt false accusations (a 8 rio dStKios xpeyea-Oai). 

a 6. Seiv oloixevos vTrepe^x^eLV, " fancying that he is gaining 
credit." of/xat Seiv elvai, from meaning "I think it must be," 
passes to the meaning " I fancy that it is." Cp. Eep. 535 a 9, and 
Ale. II. 144 d 8, 1461)5, where (r)) olriOrjvaL Selv -qixas etSevac is 
replaced at 146 b 9 by (a tls olSev rj) SoKei ctSevat. In other words 
Sciv is becoming redundant. Cp. below on d 5. [J.B.M. interprets 
it — " fancying that his only way to win is by running down 
others," i.e. that 5. ol. v. means " thinking that he has got to."] 

b 1. dyvfxvaa-TOV ttoiwv = " crippling." 

b 2. [to eavTov fxepo<^, " as far as he is concerned " J.B.M.] 

b 4. (US oTt /xaAto-ra emphasizes the injunction to mercy, as 
being the more necessary one. — ^^aAcTra, " dangerous." 

b 6. fxaxofMevov and dfjivvoixevov are subordinate to viKiovTa. 
Cp. above 638 d 5 tovs /n-q xpoifievovs avrio 6po)fJL€v viKtovras 
lxa^op.€Vov<Sy 699 b 6 to viKyjcrat fxa^op,kvov<i. — tw ^r^Sei/ avt€i'ai = 
" inflexibly." 

C 1. Ta 8' : sc. dSiKrjixara. This is an adverbial neut. ace. ; " as 
to the sins of all those who, etc." — tiov 6<jol : of this demonstrative 
use of the article when followed by a relative Ast gives, besides 
ten instances from the subsequent books of the Laws, others from 
Epiji. 974 c, Phil. 21 c, Prot. 320 d. Soph. 241 e. Rep. 469 b, 510 a, 
cf. also Theaet. 168 a. Except at Theaet. 168 a and Laws 761 e 
and 871 e the relative is always otros or ottoctos. — For av twv Stob. 
and A have avrojv (ace. to Burnet) — Schanz says A has aurwv — a 
curious mistake which the other MSS. seem all to have escaped. — 
lard is ace. with dScKovcn understood. 

C 2. eKwVj "deliberately," or "with his eyes open"; i.e. he fails 
to see the intrinsic connexion between misery and wrongdoing. 
This, in effect, Avas called at 689 a rj ka-ydri) dpaOia. So at 663 b f. 
the error of thinking that to rjSv can ever be separated from to 
SUaiov is partly explained and clearly condemned. There, and at 
Rep. 589 d, this doctrine — the Kern des Socratismus, as Gomperz calls 
it {Gk Denk. ii. 53) — is defended on the ground that no man who 
thoroughly understood where his own interest lay could possibly 
be persuaded to go in any other direction ; and so it is defended here. 

c 4. K€KTrJTo : though A^ added an iota above the line to the rj 
of A's K€KTr]To, all the other MSS. and Stob. and all the editions 
up to Ast have KeKTrjro. Ast notices the mistake in his note — 
probably after reading Elmsley on Eur. Heracl. 283. 

c 6. The omission of the seventeen letters -tov €v ovv tw Tt/xttoTa- 

486 



NOTES TO BOOK V 731 C 

in A is a striking instance of a common transcriber's error ; from 
one T6/xtwTa- his eye strayed to the other. 

C 7 f. aAAa . . . c'xwi', " you axe bound to pity the wrongdoer 
just as much as any other sufferer." An idiomatic use of ye . . . 
Kai ; cp. above on 730 c 6. 

d 1. cyx^P^^ • this way of putting it suggests that the right- 
minded man will want to pardon all wrongdoers. 

d 2. /cat /XT) . . . SiaTeXetv, " instead of storming away like an 
angry woman " ; aKpaxoXovvra is subordinate to iriKpaLvofievov 
and yvvaiK€Lii)s qualifies the latter. 

d3. (XK/aaTws, "thoroughly," rather than *' immoderately " as 
Wagner {ma.<^slos), though at 773 a, and Phil. 64 e the contrast 
with rh (rvfx/jL€Tpov gives aKpaTos the meaning of excessive, 
immoderate. There is no reason, with Ast, to emend to avtarw?, 
which would be merely a repetition of what has been said before : 
" thoroughly and incorrigibly disorderly and vicious." 

d 4 f. H. Steph. would reject either irpkireiv or Setv. Ast, in his 
note, would read et irpkireL for TrpeTretv — this would make eKcto-roTe 
superfluous — but he takes the right view in his Lex. when he says 
that Setv is redundant, as it is below at e 3 after 6pO(o<s e^ei and at 
Rep. 473 a, 486 d, and 535 a — o'tov Sety CKAeKreas elvai. (Stallb. 
here, and Adam at Rep. 535 a, hold that both the Seiv and the 
other expression have their full force.) The redundancy is con- 
versational, and similar to the slovenly English " I should have 
liked to have seen." [J.B.M. would prefer to omit efvat, and take 
TTpkireiv to mean " to be conspicuous as."] 

d 5. eKacTTOTe : the distributive use, " as occasion demands " ; 
so at 801 a 6 tois 6iot<s ols Ovo/xev eKao-Tore. 

d 6-e 5. TTOLVTiov . . . cKacTTOTe, "but there is a fault of the soul 
more serious than any other — one which most men are born with, 
which nobody thinks so seriously of as to try to get rid of it ; and 
that is that which people mean when they say that everybody is 
naturally dear to himself, and that this [law of nature] is quite 
right. Whereas it is in reality the source of all kinds of sins that 
men commit from time to time, just because they are too proud of 
their own selves." Plutarch paraphrases this whole passage at the 
beginning of his treatise Quomodo Adulator , etc. Wyttenbach, 
in his commentary on Plutarch, suggests that Plato had in mind 
Eur. Ft. 460 (Nauck) €K€lvo yap ttcttov^' oVe/a ttcivtcs f^poroi' 
(piXiov pidXia-r' €p,avTov ovk ai(T\vvopLai. (Cp. also Cyclops 334.) 
Cp. Arist. Rhet. i. 1371b 19 dvdyKi] navras ^lAaiJTovs eivaL -t] 
pLaXXov 7] rJTTov, and Ar. Pol. ii. 1263 b 2 t6 8e <f)iXavTov ctvat 

487 



731 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

xpeyerai St/catws ; where Ar. explains tliat it is the excess of self- 
love that is bad. 

e 3. For the redundant Seiv see above on d 5. (Ast and Stallb. 
say that to Sclv stands for " the saying that it ought " or " the idea 
that it ought " ; and H. Steph. actually j)roposes to insert Aeyeti/ 
after to. — J.B.M. translates the 8eiv by the words given above 
on a 6. (Ought we possibly to read toS' elvai for to Seiv elvai ?) 
— TO 8e : possibly " whereas " — the adverbial use ; cp. on 630 d 8, 
and Apol. 23 a, where tw ovTt follows to Se just as dXrjOeta does 
here ; cp. also above 642 a 3, But perhaps it is better to take to 
as a demonstrative as J.B.M. suggests. — The words Sia Ty]v a-cfioSpa 
kavTov (juXiav are added pleonastically. There is a conversational 
confusion between " it is at the bottom of all kinds of faults," and 
" all kinds of faults occur because of it." (This is perhaps better 
than to suppose these words spurious, though they do look rather 
like a marginal explanation.) 

e 5. This is a neat application of the proverb " Love is blind " ; 
— " no love," he hints, " is so blind as se(/-love." 

732 a 1. TO avTov is vaguer than any corresponding English 
expression ; it stands for " what he himself has, or is, or does, or 
says." — TT/oo tov dXrjOovs : i.e. he does not ask first what is the real 
nature of a thing, but whether it is his or not. He feels bound to 
respect anything tliat is his own, more than " the real thing," as 
we might say. 

a 2. TOV fxeyav dvSpa : cf. 730 d 6. 

a 6. oOev ktX.., " and in consequence of this notion, when we 
know little or nothing we think we know everything, and, instead 
of getting others to do things which we can't do, we incur inevitable 
disaster by trying to do them ourselves." 

b 3. TOV eavTov /^cAtiw 8liok€lv : a similar precept to that 
which tells us, at 728 c, toi§ dfieLvoa-cv eVeo-^ai. Cp. Theaet. 168 a 
/cat ere fxkv ScM^ovTat Kal (juXiqcrova-LV^ avTovs Se ^i(jrj(Tov(TLV kol 
^ev^ovTat d(f)' eavTwv els <^tAocro^iav. Schanz (followed by Burnet) 
is doubtless right in adopting the reading aet for Set ; Stob. i. 95 
has act, though at xxiii. 18 he has Set in quoting the same passage. 

b 4. jJL7)SeiJitav ai(TXTtJvr]v . . . TrpoaOev Troiovfxevov : cp. 648 d 
TO ttJs ala-^vviqs eTrtTrpoadev TTotovfievos. He must not let shame 
come between him and his purpose. To be ashamed of inferiority 
is one of the consequences of excessive love of self. — Itti tw toiovto) 
may mean " (shame) at such a course," i.e. at the accepting an 
inferior position, or " at such a fact," i.e. that he is inferior. 

b 6. The parallelism between a-fiiKpoTepa fxev TovTiov and 

488 



NOTES TO BOOK V 732 b 

\py]crLfia Se rovTiuv ov^ ^ttov forbids us to follow Stallb. in 
removing the comma after tJttoj/ and placing it after Se. — Aeyetv 
kavTov dvafjLifxvya-KovTa, " repeat by way of reminding oneself of 
them," (The "Vere de Vere repose" is only to be secured by 
constant self-reminders.) 

b 7. TovvavTLov = •' by a movement in the opposite direction " ; 
not, as Wagner, "auf der entgegengesetzten Seite." — The subj. to 
iTTippetv would be avro, supplied from rtvo?. — Plato here, using 
language especially suggestive of the ebb and flow of the tide, 
appeals to the law of Nature expounded at Phaedo 72 a b, according 
to which (yevio-Ls being always from opposite to opposite) all change 
"goes in a circle," now this way, now that. Cp. what he says 
about action and reaction at 676 b 9-c 4, and at Hep. 563 e 8 ; cp. 
also the dva KVKXrjo- is spoken of at Pol. 269 e. 

b 7 ff. This passage should, I think, be stopped with a fall stop 
after dvaixL/jLvya-Kovra, and colons (or possibly commas) after 
€7rt/3/oetv and aTroX.enrovcr'qs, to mark dva/xv. . . . (xttoA. as a paren- 
thesis. The uicnrep does not go naturally with the gen. abs. The 
construction is like that at Rep. 330 c uxnrep yap . . . ayaTrwcrtv, 
Tavi"Q re 8r) . . . cnrovSa^ova-tv. — 8lo S^ \prf — a conversational 
brachylogy (so Stallb.) for "and that is why I say (everybody) 
ought " — " resumes " iocnrep yap . . . Set, and 8' introduces what 
we may call the second premiss of the argument. He founds the 
need of his injunction upon the natural law of "action and 
reaction," as exemplified in dvap^vqcris (for which cf. Phil. 34 b). 

C 2. TvapayyeXXeLV must have an object inf. supplied : " urge 
everybody else so to do." Badham's okrjv <7r6X.1v> and Schanz's 
Trdcrav kol oXtjv Tnpi^dpeLav alter the construction and make 
ireipdcrdaL depend on vapayyeXXeLv ; this arrangement, though it 
gets rid of a slight difficulty — that of the want of an obj. to 
irapayyeXXeiv — does more harm by obliterating the correspondence 
between yiXcoriov re etpyea-dai and Kal oA. rreptx. diroKp. ev(T\. 
ireipda-daL^ i.e. between the particular and the general repression 
of emotion. 

C 4 ff. Kara re . . . Trpd^eanv, "whether each man's destiny is 
steady and fair " (lit. " established in prosperity "), " or it chance 
that men's destinies find themselves face to face with certain 
undertakings as with a high steep hill." re . . . Kal is sive . . . 
sive. — For ckcio-tov cf. Phaedo 107 d 6 cKacrTou Sat/xajv, and Rep. 
620 d e/cao-TO) ov itXero Satfxova. — Kara Tv;^as is "in the course of 
Fortune's changes." — The contrast is between a steady run of good 
fortune, and a period of strenuous fighting with obstacles. Most 

489 



732 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

interpret era take Sat/xoi/tov to denote an external opposing force — 
as if a man's Genius sometimes helped, and sometimes hindered 
him. It seems better to suppose the Genius to be so closely 
identified with the man as to share his difficulties, as well as his 
good fortune. At Tim. 90 a Plato calls each man's soul his Salfjuov. 
The language in both cases is poetical and, to a certain extent, 
metaphorical. — The change to the plur. (Sat/xovwv), after iKacrTov, 
is a quite common variety of expression. {tvxo.s may mean fate in 
a sinister sense, but not, by itself, misfortune. This is against 
Zeller's proposal to translate k. t. by " auf die Seite des Unglilcks," 
and omit otov . . . Trpd^ea-cv as a " Glossem." Schanz adopts 
Zeller's a^er^/crts, avoiding the above - mentioned difficulty by 
reading, with Badham, Kar' dTv^tas. — Badhani further remodels 
the passage by excluding Saifxovwv and reading ai/^tcrra/xev'ov. — 
It is a hard passage. [J.B.M. inclines to Badh.'s Kar' aTv^Las.]) 

C 6 ff. rots . . . ayadoLcri , . . eAarrovs TroL-qaeiv, " will alleviate 
(the toils) by the blessings.^' (Schneider cannot be right in making 
ay aOoLcrc masc, and translating a SuipeiTai ^'"per ea quae largitur.") 

d 1. I think Twv Trapovriav is neut., "their present lot" — 
so Ficinus praesentia ; most interpreters supply irovuiv with 
TrapovTiov. 

d 2. With /xera^oAa? we must supply TroiTjo-iiv from the pre- 
ceding clause. — Trepl Se to. dyada . . . TvxrjSj " while as for their 
good things, they must hope that, by God's good help, entirely the 
opposite of this (diminution) will always happen to them." — The 
change from the singular {dTroKpvTTTopievov) to the plur. (avrois) 
was really made when Sai/xdvwv in c 6 was substituted for Saip-ovos. 
{to. kvavria tovtiov is generally taken to be in apposition to 
TO. dyaOd ; but this — as Peipers (p. 100) says — is a very weak 
addition ; besides, to, kvavria rrdvra makes a much better subject 
to IT a pay evqcTiG- 6 at than irdvTa referring back to Trepi to, dyadd. — 
Travra rd kvavria is a plural variety of irdv rovvavTiov. — The first 
of these objections to the ordinary interpretation would be obviated 
if, with Peipers, we rejected rd dyaOd, or placed it after irapa- 
yevyjcrecrdaL — but not the latter.) 

d 4. ravrais rai^ cATrtVtv and rai? vTropLvija-ecri tt. t. t. may be 
described as " datives of effective accompaniment " ; raurats goes 
with both. 

d 5. p.y8€v (fietSopievov, "without any relaxation of effort." — 
Kara re TraiStots Kal cnrovSds, " whether in work or play." 

d 6. dvapLLpLvycTKovra erepov re Kal eavrov tra^tus is a repetition 
of kavr. dva/xv. at b 6 and TrapayyeXXav Se Travrl irdvr' dvSoa at 

490 



NOTES TO BOOK V 732 d 

c 2. In general' these recommendations are an injunction to have 
faith in the beneficence of Providence — " /jly) fxepLfivaTe" 

d 8 f. The cTrtTt/Sev/xara are those described from 726to730a9. 
The TToiov TLva xpeoyv elvat has been dealt with from 730 b 1 to 
732 d 7. 

e 1. Hermann rightly altered the MS. avrov to avTov. 

e 2. The arguments used to recommend certain conduct under 
both heads are described as Oela because the religious motive and 
the religious sanction have been appealed to throughout. What 
follows (to, av 6 piiiiT iva) is an appeal to a man^s own interests. 

e 5. €^ wv . . . /xeyio-rats, " to which you may say no single 
mortal creature can help being bound by ties of closest and 
most complete dependence." cnrovSats denotes, not the " eager 
interest " (Jowett) which we take in these matters, but the serious, 
vital nature of their influence on us. 

e 7. oTt T(p (TX'qfxaTi KpaT€t 7rp6? evSo^iav : i.e. such high 
ground as this is what we have been taking in discussing the 
religious aspects of conduct ; the motives now appealed to are 
lower, and concern, not our reputation, but our comfort. 

733 a 1. For (OS "on the ground that," "because of" cp. Gorg. 
509 e 2, 512 c 2, Tim. 58 b 2. There is no need, with Stallb., to 
say that it is used " perinde ac si Aeyeiv antegressum sit." 

a 2. veos wv : this is a hint that youth is the time when 
we are most in danger of being blind to the advantages of a 
virtuous life. Like the Preacher's " in the days of thy youth," 
too, it implies that devotion to virtue is more valuable and 
efficacious then, than at a later time. 

a 6 ff . The words from the first o-K07retv to the second cTKOTretv 
— €LT€ . . . cTKOTretv — were omitted in the first four printed 
editions, though Ficinus translated them. They were first 
printed by Stephanus. Probably he read them in the Venice 
MS. S, for this MS. seems to be the only one which has his Se 
after the first /3lov in a 8. This 8e, which remained in Ast, 
Herm. and the Ziir. ed., led to the placing of a full stop after 
7ra/oa (fivo'Lv, and this punctuation survived the expulsion of the 
8i. Burnet was the first to substitute a comma for this full stop ; 
and he also placed a colon after the first o-KOTretv, where previous 
edd. had either put a comma, or no stop at all. Burnet's reading 
may be rendered, " but what is the right way to appreciate it ? 
That is what the Argument has now got to teach us to see : we 
must compare one life with another, the more pleasant with the 
more painful, and ask, in the following way, whether in such and 

491 



733 a THE LAWS OF PLA^O 

such a case (ovtws) it" (i.e. the life) "suits our nature, or, in another 
case (aAAws) it does not suit it." The investigation that follows 
reaches the converse of the conclusion stated at Tim. 8 1 e : irav 
yap TO ix€v Trapa cfyvaLv akyeLVov, to 8' y irecfiVKe ytyvofievov rjSv. 
^ (Ritter's objections to Trapot <^v(jlv seem to me to be invalidated 
by taking — as above — etre . . . etVe as dependent on aKo-n-elv — 
cp, Phaedr. 275 c ov yap €K€lvo /xovov (TKOTrets, ecre ovr(D<s ctVe 
akXios c'xet — and by taking /3tos as the subj. of irkf^vKe. He 
treats ovrtos and aAAws as the emphatic words, and Kara <jiV(TLv as 
a colourless amplification of TT€(jiVKe ; also, I conclude that he, and 
former interpreters, either take 7r€(f)VK€ as impersonal, or make 
rj opOory)^ its subject.) 

b 1. TO fjirjSeTepov, "what is neither pleasure nor pain." (This, 
ace. to Epicurus, is " the chief good.") 

b 2 ff . From rjSov^s to the second jx€i^ovos was omitted in the 
first four printed editions (but again not by Ficinus), but 
Cornarius, whose translation appeared with the fourth of them 
(Basil. 2) discovered the omission. 

b 5 f . icra . . . SiacracfieLv, " we could give no positive reason for 
desiring a mixture in which both these two ingredients were in 
equal quantity." No doubt, however, if it were a question of 
choosing this mixture in place of one where XvTrr] predominated, 
there would be a reason for so choosing it — just as to fxrjBeTepov 
was declared above to be preferable to Xvirrp This is in fact 
stated below at c 6 fF. 

b 6-c 1. Ast objects that irpo's f^ovXrjcTLv and tt/jos a'tpeo-Lv 
say the same thing twice over, and holds that the words tt/sos 
aiptcTLv sKaaTiDV were originally jjlaced either before or after 
€^ dvayK-qs in the next sentence. Schanz would reject irpos 
l3ovXY)(riv. Burnet, by putting a comma after ^ovXy](Tiv — i.e. 
taking the words with evavTca — provides them with a con- 
struction. At b 1 we had a distinction made between alpovpeOa 
and l3ovX6fX€da, and at 734 c 1 f3ovXr]cri<5 and at/aeo-is are both 
used. Here, indeed, both are needed for the sense, which is, that 
what incites or repels desire, decides the choice. We may translate 
" all these objects of choice are either preferable or not " (lit. " are 
superior or not in respect to the choice of each several object "), " in 
virtue of frequency, of amount, of intensity, or again of equality 
of composition, or in virtue of qualities which are the opposite 
to such as I have named in their appeal to desire " (i.e. by being 
few, small, or feeble). Ast is right, I think, in saying that 
TO. firjSev SiacfiepovTa are — not objects of dislike, but — what 

492 



NOTES TO BOOK V 733 b 

Aristotle would have called to. d8Ld(f>opa. Plato means that — 
while desire may be excited by strong motives or by weak — if the 
objects of desire and repulsion are equally mixed in any life, or in 
any object of choice, such an object will not be chosen. 

c 1-6. We have not yet come to the consideration of the case 
where a neutral object is placed side by side with a positively 
repulsive one (for that cf. c 8 ff.). We are now dealing with the 
measurable amount of pleasure or pain ; and he goes on to remind 
us that when a life contains amounts of both, we must decide by 
the preponderance of one or the other. And so he leads up to the 
pronouncement that, though e.g. the vehemence of a pleasurable 
emotion is in itself desirable, a situation, or a life, in which 
pleasure is feeble, is preferable to one in which the pleasure is 
intense, if in the latter case the pleasure is overbalanced by con- 
comitant pain, whereas the feeble pleasure is not so overbalanced. 

C 7. KaOdrrep €V rots Trpoadev : i.e. just as we did above (at b 1) 
in considering the case of to pLrfSeTepov. 

c 8. It seems clear to me that Ritter is right in reading 
vir€pj3dX.XovTa here. (Ast had suggested tov /xev vTrep/SdXXovTa 
. . . Toi/ S' av.) Plato says : " The life of equipoise, as sur- 
passing the one class — i.e. those lives where pain predominates — 
in the possession of what we like, we desire ; but, as surpassing 
the other class in what we dislike, we do not desire it." E.g. where 
pain is 5 and pleasure 5, there is, in effect, more pain than 
where pain is 5 and pleasure 6, and also more pleasure than 
where pain is 6 and pleasure 5. 

(Prof. Burnet, for reasons which he has kindly communicated 
to me, prefers to retain the MS. virepfSaXXovTiov. He finds in 
the rjfXLv Kara (fivcnv and rrapd (jivcnv of a 7 f., and specially below 
in the rh <f)iXov dfxa Kal rjSv of e 1, a suggested distinction between 
what is T^Sv generally, and what is rj8v to the individual by being 
specially adaptable to his nature. Thus there may be, he holds, a 
kind of we/o^oAr/ even in the Icroppoiros /3los. He construes (c 8 ff.) 
(1)9 Twv fiev (sc. Tojv rjSeiov) no (fitXto rjixtv virepfiaXXovTisiv, . . . 
TMV 8' av (sc. Twv XvTrrjpMv) tois e-^Spots {rj/J-lv v7r€pf3aXX6vT(ov).) 

d 2. €v TovTOLS €v8e8€fji€V0L {7r€(f>vKa(TLv), " are shut up (by 
nature) to these alternatives"; a repetition, in other words, of 
ovTO) . . . TovTiov €^ dvdyK-qs SiaKeKOcriJirjjxevMV elf. 

d 3. Stallb. proposes to reject Sei StavoeLcrOaL at c 7. It does 
seem out of place here. I suspect, though, that we ought not 
simply to dismiss it, but to substitute for it Statpelcrdai, or possibly 
Set ^Lacpeia-daL : " we have got to explain (on these principles) 

493 



733 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

which lives nature bids us desire." For this use of Siatpeia-OaL 
cp. 647 c 1. 

d 4. By ravra he means the same limits or conditions as by 
TovTOLs in d 3 ff . If, that is, we say that we are guided in our 
desires by any other consideration than that of the preponder- 
ance of pleasure, it must be because we know nothing of the 
world. 

d 7 ff . I follow all editors but Badham and Schanz in adopting 
the first-hand correction of A's Sivizep to wv irkpt ; it is a correc- 
tion evidently made from A's original, and not out of the scribe's 
head. — I also accept Burnet's sagacious dOerrjcris of ckovctlov 
dfiovXrjTov T€ Kol ; it looks exactly as if some presumptuous 
scribe had doubted the possibility of using aKovcrtov as the 
opposite of f3ov\y]rov ; besides, it greatly overweights the 
article to. — The accumulation of participles — TrpoeXoinevov, 
tSovra, ra^a/xevov, eAo/xevov — makes the sentence clumsy, as read. 
The intonation of the speaker is wanted, to put each into its place 
The participles ISovra and ra^a/xevov convey the main ideas ; i.e. 
it is they which depend on Sel. " What lives, and how many 
lives are there, between which when a man selects, on a review of 
the desirable and the undesirable, he ought to make this considera- 
tion into a law for himself, and so, picking out what not only he 
likes, and finds pleasant, but also is best and noblest, lives the 
happiest life he possibly can ? " 

e 1. I am strongly inclined to accept Badham's ingenious lSlov 
TLva for ISovra ; it relieves us of one participle, and makes an 
apposite qualification of vofiov. (Against his rewriting of the 
previous words — Sivrrep Set TrpoeXofxevov tov /SovX-qrov re Kal 
eKovcTLov d/3ovXrjr<j)v re Kal dKovcriMv — it is to be urged that all 
along it is the particular thing in the life, not the life itself that 
has been spoken of as the object of desire ; here, in particular, we 
are said to make ourselves a law out of such preferences as will 
guide us in the choice of a life.) — ro (fyiXov ayaa Kal rjSv I take to 
be a sort of explanation and resumption of the phrase ro) cftiXov 
-qfXLv used at d 1. 

e 3. dvdpoiTTov MSS. I feel sure that Plato wrote dvdpioTruv 
here. — Cp. 637 a 1 KaXXtcrr' dvOpwTroyv and 729 e I Trdvrcov 
KaXXio-r dvdpii)7r(j}v. — The TrpoeXopevov in d 7, to which we 
naturally supply rtvd, is not helped by the distant dvOpuiirov. 

e 6. (Tiixfipova [x\v qvv . . . irdvra, " anyone who is familiar 
with the discreet life will set it down as mild in every respect." 

734 a 4. The re after eVt^v/xias should be rejected, I think. 

494 



NOTES TO BOOK V 734 a 

It may be due to the confusion between 8c and re after tr^o8/)as. 
(See Burnet's note.) 

a 7. For Plato's arguments in support of this cf. Gorg. 493 f. 

a 8. TrvKvoTfjcriv : to find the meaning of this word here we 
must consider it in relation (1) to its neighbours fxeyWei and 
TrXYjOet, (2) to crcfioSpoTrja-iv at 733 b 7, and (3) to fxavorepa below 
at c 6. All the translations I know, except Jowett's, take it to 
mean frequency of occurrence. If so, in order to fit it in with its 
neighbours, we must suppose irXr^Oei to refer to the large number 
of different pleasurable or painful sensations, and irvKvoTr^a-iv to 
the frequent recurrence of the same. Sometimes number and 
frequency mean the same thing. A large number of sensations, 
which only occur at long intervals, would have much the same 
effect on us as a small number. This consideration no doubt 
made Jowett translate it here by the same word he used for 
(TcfioSpoTrjcrLv at 733 b 7, i.e. intensity. On the other hand, it was 
not very clear how we ought to distinguish between (T<f)o8p6Trja-Lv 
and fx^ykdet at 733 b 7, and below we shall find a similar difficulty 
with either kXarToa-iv or crpiKpoTepa and fxavorepa — according as 
we take the latter word. Therefore, though ttvkvos and /xavos 
may, as at Tim. 53 a, mean solid and flimsy respectively, it is 
better to recognize that, in all three of our enumerations, the 
members are not very sharply defined — that two out of each three 
mean very much the same thing — and hence I would accept the 
more ordinary meanings of frequency for TrvKvorrjcnv here and 
rarer for ixavorepa at c 6. (At Eep. 573 e ttvkvos is apparently 
distinguished from cr^o^pds.) 

b 6. evSerjs wv, "when it lacks"; Plato does not mean that 
all mankind always live without restraint, but that when any man 
lacks it, the reasons are what he describes. " There's not a man 
living, whose self-indulgence is not due, either to ignorance, or to 
lack of self-control." 

C 1. r} /3ovX.r)(TLS rrjs alp€(r€(j)<s, " (our) intention in choosing." 

C 3. In this formal statement — the <f>aifjL€v av marks it as such 
— Plato repeats the conclusion already arrived at, before adding 
the two new ones which rely on the same sort of arguments ; each 
analogous case supports the other. There is no reason to follow 
Cornarius, Ast, and Wagner, in rejecting 6 Srj . . . aKoXdcrTov. 
By a similar irregularity the pair of lives riytetvos and voo-wSrys 
only takes its place in the last of this series of enumerations. The 
grouping, as always with Plato, is picturesque ; the order is not 
that of parade. 

495 



734 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 5. o rrjs dvSpetas {fStos) : this expression, so natural in 
English of a formal style, whether of poetry or prose, was a poetical 
one in Greek. Stallb. cps. Eur, Bacch. 388 6 ras rjo-vxias f^toros, 
Phaedr. 276 d ei? to Avy^^/s yrjpas eav iKrjTaLj where Heindorf s 
comment is " verba autem haec poetam sapiunt." (Zeller adds this 
to his list of faulty phrases from the Laivs.) 

C 6. fxavorepa : cp. above on a 8. — rfj tow rj8ovo)v, " on the 
score of pleasure." Lobeck, Paral. p. 363, is indignant that the 
neuter article or adjective should " adminiculo egere nullo " in 
expressing an abstract notion, while a feminine must always be 
supposed to have an attendant in the background. It is not 
necessary to " supply " anything here with ry. {vTrepfSoXy^ peptSt, 
Tctcrei have been suggested.) — eKarepos eKarepov : it is absurd of 
Ast — in his anxiety to support his a^eT7yo-is of 6 . . . aKoXdo-Tov — to 
say that these words could only be used of two pairs of lives. 
Strictly they only apply to a single pair — 6 avSpelos and 6 SetXos, 
because the last mentioned ; but in sense iKarepos goes with all 
the subjects of vlkwctl, and eKarepov with all its objects. He 
might have said tKarepoL eKar^povs vTrepfSaXXovres as far as the 
meaning of eKarepos goes. — dficfiOTepa : i.e. both pleasurable and 
painful sensations. 

C 7. €K€ivoiv virepf^aXXovruiV : an adversative clause, subordinate 
to kKarepos . . . vTrepf^dXXiov. 

d 1. There is a break here, and the place of the subject is 
resumed by 6 pikv dvSpetos. (Peipers, p. 97 note, goes further than 
Cornarius and Ast, for he would reject the whole passage from 6 8r] 
cru)(f)p(i)u to vtKwo-t, on the ground (1) that it repeats what was said 
before, (2) that the construction is a tangled one, and (3) that the 
meaning of several words is obscure.) 

d4. There is a triumphant exuberance about the emphatic 
summing up of the often argued cause. — I fancy that a final 
revision would not have left two wcrTe clauses so near each other as 
those at d 2 and d 7. 

d 5. Kara crw/xa rj /cat Kara \pv\rjv^ " whether it be in body or 
in soul " ; the implication is that, though it is easier to see in the 
case of the body, the truth is just as undoubted in the case of the 
soul. (Schanz follows H. Miiller in rejecting the t).) 

d 6. Tois dXXois : i.e. in other respects besides being more 
enjoyable ; the following datives are in explanatory apposition to 
TOtS dXXoLs. 

el. dTrepyd^ecrdaihaiS Tov €XovTa . . . ^i]v as its object: "secures 
that its possessor lives, etc." (It is anyhow an awkward construe - 

496 / 



NOTES TO BOOK V 7346 

tion ; is the ^rjv possibly spurious ?) — evSaiixovecrTcpov is adj., 
not adv. 

e 3-735 a 6. " So far tlie preface to our laws, and there it ends. 
After the ' prelude ' it is right and proper that a ' tune ' should 
follow, and this is really the place for a general outline of civic 
institutions. Now just as, in the case of a web or woven structure 
of any description, you cannot make both woof and warp of the 
same kinds of thread, but the substance of the warp must be of a 
superior nature to that of the woof — for the former is strong and 
endowed with a character of firmness, while the latter is softer and 
is bound to yield — from this comparison we may conclude it to be 
reasonable that the men who are destined for rule in our cities 
should in each case be set apart in some such way (as the warp 
threads are) from those whose temper has been tried by only a 
slight education. For (you must know that) there are two 
branches of civic organization, the one being the conferring of 
office on individuals, the other the providing your officers with (a 
code of) laws (to administer)." 

e 4 f . The use of the singular shows that vojxos — and con- 
sequehtly TrpooifiLov too — are used in the technical musical sense 
(as at Rep. 531 d, Tim. 29 d), to which there is a punning 
reference in the subsequent vofiovs. Cp. Jowett, Introd. p. 76, 
though in his, and all other translations or commentaries that I 
know, the musical sense is ignored here. 

e 6. v7roypd<fi€Lv : the "outline" of the subject, for which he 
selects this place in the treatise, is the division of the politician's 
domain into two branches, defined at 735 a 5 f., — (1) the (training 
and) selection of magistrates, and (2) the provision of laws 
for them to execute. This division corresponds in spirit to 
the disposition of the subject matter throughout the Laws. 
Roughly speaking, two thirds of the treatise deal with the 
" personnel " of the citizens of all ranks — their selection, their 
training, and their enlightenment by means of 7r/oooi/xta, and the 
way they can be influenced generally ; the other third consists 
of statutes. Naturally the character of the magistrates is more 
important than that of any other citizen. — crvvv(f)'qv : this and 
its fellow accusatives have no verb to govern them ; they are 
" dropped " with the modification of the structure of the sentence. 

735 21 1. Ast would read ev rats crrpo<^ais for kv rots T/307rots, 
but such a general word as t/oottos is quite in place, and is useful 
in the metaphor. Cp. Hdt. iv. 28 KexiopuTTat Be ovro<s 6 x€Lp.u)V 
Tovi T/DOTTovs TTaai TolcTL kv aXXiQcrL ^Mprjo-i y€V0[X€V0L(TL ^et/xoxrt. 
VOL. I 497 2 K 



735 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

a 2. oOev S-q : another conversational break in the form of the 
sentence. After KaSairep ovv at e 6 we should expect " wo-a^uTO)? 
Kol vel simile quid " (Ast). He goes on as if the simile had been 
fully drawn out, instead of hinted at. — tovs ras ap\a<i . . . 
ap^ovTas : this is the reading of L and — the reading which 
Ficinus translated — " qui magistratus in civitate gesturi sunt," — 
and to which Aristotle refers when he says {Pol. ii. 1265 b 18) 
cAAeActTrrat Se tois vofJLOis tovtols kol to. jrepl tov<s ap^ovras ttws 
€(rovTai 8ia(f)€povT€<s twv apyop^kviav. (fitjcri yap Seiv locnrep e^ krkpov 
TO (TTrjpLoviov epLOV yiverai rrys KpoKYj<i, ovtco kol rovs aya^ovras 
€;(€tv Seiv 7rpo<s rovs apyop.kvov;. A has /xeyaAas for rots, and so 
a marginal variant of 0. For a long time the reading in printed 
edd. was Tov<i ras /xeyaAas . . . ap^ovTas — though the first four 
edd. had ap^avras. Schanz adopts A's fxcydXas for ras, and, 
further, Biicheler's alteration of a-piKpa in a 4 to o-jxiKpaq (so too 
Bruns). (Schanz and Burnet say Stob. has toxs ras apxa?? but in 
Meineke's ed. vol. ii. p. 194 the text is rovs ras /xeyaAas ap^a<i.) 
Apart from authority, the passage becomes comparatively meaning- 
less if we assume that the comparison is between the superior 
"grit" — to use another metaphor — of the greater magistrates^ as 
compared with the lesser ones. The stouter threads are clearly 
magistrates — of all orders — who execute the laws, and the 
"yielding," weaker ones the general populace who have to obey 
them. It is hard to account for the ficydXas ; possibly it was 
due to a commentator's suggestion of fjieydXrj for (rfxiKpa^ made 
under the impression that rovs . . . irai^eia ^acravia-devTas was 
a further description of the magistrates themselves, and their class. 

a 3. TLva TpoTTov TavT'fj '. a variety for tolovto) tlvI t/ootto). 

a 4. fBa(ravLa-6€VTa<s : this word suggests, on the one hand, the 
teasing and twisting of the thread, and, on the other, the " severity " 
and "thoroughness" of the educative and testing process. — 
e/caa-TOTc : almost our " respectively." — Stobaeus inserts kuI 
before Kara Aoyov. — There is a surprising variety in the interpre- 
tation — as well as in the reading — of this whole passage : e.g. 
Ast finds in it a comparison between warp and the harsh power 
of the ruler, and beween the woof and the milder action of the 
legislator. Stallb. says the woof typifies the laivs. 

a 5. yap Si] J "nam profecto," "for I must tell you." The 
clause throws a fresh light on the subject just discovered, reveal- 
ing the important part played by the election of magistrates in 
the organization of a state, and providing us, in so doing, with 
the vTToypaf^ri we have been promised above at e 6. — Bruns 

498 



NOTES TO BOOK V 735 a 

(p. 191 note) pronounces this sentence "inept" ; the yct/o, he says, 
is only explicable on the assumption that the method of selecting 
and appointing magistrates was immediately to follow. — See also 
on 751 a 4 below. — 8vo TroAtreias €187; : this phrase is repeated in 
the same sense at 751 a — 8vo eiSr) Tavra irepl TroXiTetas Koa-fxov 
yiyv6fx€va rvy\dv€L. — The etSrj TroAiTetwi/ at 681 d and 714 b 
means something quite different. 

a 7. rh Se TT/oo tovtwv aTrdvToyv : neither of the above-mentioned 
branches is considered until the beginning of Bk. VI. The rest 
of this book deals with the preliminary conditions of citizenship — 
6 8rj Aa^^wv KCKT-qcrOoi, <^a/x€v, toi' Kkyjpov em toutois ols elpr\Kayi.ev 
744 a 8 — which are mainly these : (1) The government is to have 
the power of rejection and expulsion of citizens — whose numbers 
are to be limited ; (2) Property, though allowed, is to be by all 
possible means kept in the background, and kept equal. 

b 2. Trapaka^iiiv goes with all three nominatives. — L and O have 
€7rt;(€i/oi^cr€i, A (and L^, 0^ and Stob.) has eTrtx^t/^r^tnyt, but the 
last two letters have been altered from something else. The first 
six printed edd. read iTrtxeiprjcreLe. (Cp. Goodwin, M. and T. § 295.) 

b 3. Kadapfiov Kadapel: the religious associations of these 
words seem to add a sanction to this purging process. 

b 4. KaOdprj MSS,, Kadap€i Ast. It is curious that the 
manifestly incorrect form — possibly subj. of the late first aor. 
€Ka.dapa, but most probably a mere copyist's error — should have 
held its ground longer than the quite possible iinxeLpi^o-r} above ; 
even Schneider keeps KaOdprj (but not €7rL\€Lpi](Tr)), Ziirr. and 
Herm. keep both subjunctives. It is possible that the first 
mistake was the earlier, and drew the other in its train. — ry 
(rvvoLKr]<T€L : at first sight these words seem unnecessary, and we 
could easily supply dykXrj with kKdcnrj. Possibly it was put in 
to improve the rhythm of the sentence, and suggest the hiunan 
community to which the dykX-q or crvvoLKr](TL<s is being likened. 

b 5. TO, fxev ktA. : cp. Kep. 410 a 1 tovs /xev €v<jiV€i<s tol criofiaTa 
Kai Ttts \^v^a9 6€pa7r€V(TOV(rL, tovs 8c /xi^, 6(tol fiev Kara (rto/Aa tolov- 
TOi, d7ro6vy(TK€iV eao"Ovo'tv, tov<s 8e Kara tt^v xpvxrjv KaKOcfiV€i<s Kai 
avcaroi;? auTot d^oKTevovcriv. — Plato uses his favourite chiasmus 
here. (Wagner thinks there is no chiasmus, but that the good are 
sent away, and the bad retained for medical treatment. But 
6€pa7r€V€LV is much more likely to be used — as in the Republic 
passage just quoted, and as at Gorg. 516 e — of the training of the 
good, than of the curing of the had. Expulsion and not cure is 
what he contemplates in the case of the bad citizen. 

499 



735 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

b 6 fF. Biavoovfievo^; . . . SiaKaOaipy^Tat, " for lie will reflect how 
vain and endless must be the pains he will have to take with 
the animals' bodies or with their souls if he does not purge his 
herds by discriminating selection, since either natural depravity 
or evil nurture, not content with ruining its victims, spreads the 
fatal taint to tempers and bodies, of one beast after another, which 
were hitherto sound and uncontaminated." 

b 7. For av7]vvTOs ttovos cp. dvrjvvTU) kol (XTrA^crTto KaKW 714 a, 
dvrjvvTa ttovovctlv Rep. 531 a, dvqvvrov KaKov Gorg. 507 e. 

C 3. KTrjfia.Tij)v : as Stallb. says, here, and at Gorg. 484 c fiovs 
Kol TttAAa KTr^/xara, and possibly at Laws 902 b 8, KT-q/xara seems 
to be used for Krr^vq. 

C 4. Twv dXXinv ^wwv depends on ra jikv., not on crirovBrj 
(Stobaeus has eAarrw re cnrovSy). In all ^three sentences ecrrt 
has to be supplied. 

C 6. The infins. Siepevvda-OaL and <fipd^€iv are epexegetical to 
(TTTovSrjs r^? fiey i<TT7}<s, and the t€, possibly for rhythm's sake, has 
been put earlier than its natural place, which is after StepevvdcrdaL ; 
Stobaeus has ye for it. 

c 7. TO TrpocrrJKov €Ka<jTot?, " the treatment proper to each case." 

d 1. irpd^eisiv, "dealings with them, measures, treatment 
generally" — "and the whole of the rest of their treatment." — 
avTLKa ydp^ " to begin with," " for instance." 

d 3. TV/oavvos fiev wi/ Kal vo/JiodeTrjs 6 avTos : F. Doering 
(p. 14) is mistaken in saying that 709 e 5 — 7 12 a 7 is the only 
passage in the Laws in which Plato admits that a Tvpavvos may 
be useful to a state. In both cases there is a big if in the back- 
ground. The possioility of the existence of a koct/aios Tvpavvo<s 
(710d7) or another Nestor (711 e) is spoken of as contrary to 
experience (ecf) rjpcov 8€ ovSa^uw? 71 1 e 4), so that Doering exaggerates 
when he says that it is impossible that 709 e ff., 691c 6 ff. and 
7 1 3 c 6 ff. could have been originally written as parts of the same 
book. There is not much difference between saying that an 
occurrence is extremely rare, and contrary to experience, and say- 
ing that you must act on the assumption that it is impossible. 

d 7. dyaTTiovTios, the reading of A and Stobaeus, is mentioned 
as a variant in the margin of L and 0, which have dyaTrrjTios, 
which is also given as a variant in the margin of A. Probably 
the former was early altered to dyaTrrjrm, a word which was used 
in the sense of "with difl&culty " ; for this meaning admirably 
suits this passage. It is found at Critias 106 a, Lys. 218 c, and 
possibly at Lysias, C. Andoc. p. 107 § 45. — ("You must be content 

500 



NOTES TO BOOK V 735 d 

with that " — cp. 684 c 7 — is not far from " it is much if you get 
that.") ayaTrwvrtos does not seem to occur elsewhere ; it is in 
formation like 6/xoAoyov/xc i/ws, which is common in Plato, and it 
possibly meant here " he would be quite content to do merely that." 

e 1. Tt/xcD/Dta is not here used in the sinister sense which it bears 
above at 728 c. — The whole expression seems strangely pleonastic. 

e 2. Bdvarov . . . tTriri^ets, " exacting the penalty of death or 
exile" — (lit. "making death or exile the accomplishment of the 
penalty "). 

e 6 flf. otrot . . . €7r€or^at, " all citizens who, in the struggle for 
existence " (lit. " owing to scarcity of food "), " let it be known that 
they have made themselves ready, in their poverty, to follow their 
leaders in an attack on the property of the wealthy." 

736 a 1. TovTOfcs is governed by rt^e/Aevos : airaXXayriv may be 
in apposition to aTroiKiav, " while calling these people a colony — 
a method of banishment which brings no disgrace" — but it is 
better, as suggested by Burnet's comma after aTraAAayryi/ to see in 
the word the peculiarly Euripidean ace. in apposition to the 
actioi} of the verb (e^cTre/xi/'aTo). So Riddell, Idioms § 13. Of. 
Gorg. 507 e ravTas e7rL)(^eLpovvTa nXrjpovv, dvi^vvTOV KaKov, (The 
early printed editions read 8t' €vcf>r^fMLav d7raX.\ayrj<s, with no MS. 
authority. Ast suggests aTrakXay rj ; but this leaves rovrots un- 
accounted for. Wagner would reject dirakXay-jv ; Stallb. suggests 
dvT aTTaAAayrJs. Apelt (p. 9) would read waAAayei/ ovofxa : 
ingenious, but the text seems more natural.) 

a 3. ev/xcvws oTt fxdXicrra, " hurting their feelings as little as 
possible." — Travrl . . . Spaa-reov, " everybody who undertakes to 
frame a constitution must start by getting rid of undesirables 
somehow." Then he goes on to say that for their new settlement 
they will not be obliged to " plan (to send away) a colony, or 
select a method of purgation " ; all they will have to do is to 
admit none but such as they approve among the applicants. This 
is described by the MSS. as eVt droTTMrepa than all the KaOapjxoi, 
that have been previously described, whether dXyeivol or TrpaoTepot. 
It is clear that Ritter's aKOTrcurepa, which Burnet accepts, fits 
this statement exactly, while it is most remarkable that all previ- 
ous translators or commentators should have been content with 
the MS. reading. (Jowett neglects the 'in and translates " Our 
present case, however, is peculiar.") 

a 6. ovt' kKXay-qv riva Ka9dpcr€0j<s : all translations apparently 
take KaOdpa-eio'i to be a gen. of definition ; Schn. " delectum 
aliquem purgantem," Wagn. " irgend eine Auswahl fiir die 

501 



736 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Reinigung." — I would suggest that it is more natural to take it, 
as at 872 e 10 ovk etVai Kadapcnv aWrjv, to mean method or 
process of 'purgation, and to translate fM-qx^-vacrdat eKkoyrjv rtva 
KaO., " contrive a selection of a purgative process." iKXoyiq is 
almost always used of selecting something you want, and would 
sound strange as applied to tlie process of picking (or casting) out 
the had citizens. " Our task," he goes on to say, "is to see that 
none but the good are admitted." 

a 7. Madvig is right, I think, in rejecting Ik. If it be retained 
we must, I suppose, supply vSariov with ttoA-Awv, or else with 
(TvppiovTiov. (Wagner transl. " von vielen Orten her," Schn. " ex 
multis locis") 

b 1. Tot [i€v TT-qyoH' : we are to understand, I think, that the 
spring water is what we want in our reservoir, and the muddy 
mountain torrent what we wish to avoid ; and it seems that 
€^avT\ovvra<i in b 3 describes the drawing off of the spring 
water into the reservoir {Xt/jivrj) and the two following participles 
— both compounded with diro — the various ways of preventing 
the mountain torrents from joining the spring water, crvppeovriov 
will then be conative. In the natural course of things they would 
have flowed into the same \ijxv7] as the TnjyaL 

b 4. " Clearly no political machinery can secure us from 
trouble and risk. True (ye) ; but as in our present attempt at 
constitution-making we can arrange our facts to fit our theory, we 
will suppose the gathering of the citizens complete, and its select 
character duly secured. To do this last we must refuse admittance 
to the bad ones among the applicants for citizenship, after we have 
plied them with all good advice and allowed a sufficient time for 
a thorough appreciation of their character, while we must do all 
we can by kind and gracious treatment to win the good ones to 
our Side." 

b 6. rd (in rd S') has a demonstrative force, and is the subject 
of ecTTLv TrpaTTOfxeva, and rot vvv is an adverb of time ; lit. 
" but since these attempts (of ours) are being made now in (the 
world of) theory and not in (that of stern) fact." The early 
editions — even Ast's — have dXX for to, 8\ on no MS. authority ; 
they apparently took either Ta vvv or rd vvv Trparro/xcva as the 
subject. The MSS. of Plato all have rdS', though there seems to 
have been some hint of rd S' in 0. Those of Stobaeus have to, B\ 
which is clearly right. In A an o is written over the t. This is 
difficult to interpret ; for though to 8* (adverbial) might begin the 
sentence as well at least as aAA', it is hard to make anything of t68'. 

502 



NOTES TO BOOK V 736 b 

b 7. Tr€7r€pdvO(i) re . . . Kal . . . rj KaOaporr]^ €(rT(D (rvfifSe^yjKvla: 
so, in the analogous passage at 712a, we liad two imperatives, 
K€^pr](rpii^^r](T6ij} and cTriSeSetx^o). The substance of both passages 
is the same ; i.e. (1) the claim that the political theorist should 
should not be expected to obviate, by his arrangements, all possible 
difficulties, and (2) the admission that there must be a certain • 

amount of assumption and " make-believe " in the foundations of 
his structure. He admits this, as we see here, even in framing 
the laws for the actual community of Magnesia which is now in 
prospect. He can only legislate for that on the assumption that 
certain conditions are fulfilled. It is a mistake to suppose that 
Plato had in view (1) some theoretical conditions of city -founding, 
and (2) the actual conditions of the founding of Magnesia, as two 
distinct cases, and is talking sometimes about one and sometimes 
about the other. As Ritter says (p. 143), there is a constant 
intermingling throughout the Laws of fundamerital principle and 
positive enactment. (See below qn 739 bff.) 

C 2. Schneider and Wagner take Treidol Trdcrrj (as instrumental) 
with SiaKoyXva-iofxev ; it is better (as Jowett) to take it with 
8La/3a(ravicravT€s : persuasion, and good advice, are not efficient 
means of exclusion^ but it is reasonable that none should be finally 
condemned who have not had a good opportunity of knowing and 
choosing the right way. (Badham says Tret^oi is a mistake for 
Tretp^, and Schanz agrees with him. But ireidol fits the circum- 
stances best. The object aimed at is not to discover the bad — 
they are under suspicion, I take it, from the first — but to find 
which of them are curable) 

C 3. eU Svva/jbLv seems to qualify evfjLevet^ iXew t€ rather than 
TT poa- ay (J) pued a. "Do all we can to win them" would leave the 
method to us, but, as the method is suggested, the qualifying 
words must apply to that. 

C 6 flf. euTuxetv, cos . . . €^€(f>vyevj " was lucky in having 
escaped." Ficinus translates ws €^. by quum effugit ; Stallb. and 
Wagn. and Jowett take w? as an otiose repetition of otl — as at 
Eep. 470 d, Hdt. iii. 71 and ix. 6. Such a repetition, though not 
in Plato's style, is possible, but Stallb. has no warrant for intro- 
ducing civitas nostra as the subj. of €^e<f)vy€v. It is best to sup- 
pose that the sentence started, as anybody can see, with the 
intention of finishing with " so it is with us " ; but lost itself in a 
description of the disadvantages of a state in which it was other- 
wise. Sixteen lines lower down (737 a 2) he says : " and this (dis- 
advantage) I maintain that we escape " ; and this somewhat lamely 

603 



736 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

fills the gap. Ficinus filled it boldly by inserting after rpoirov 
(in d 2) " ita ferme et nobis accidisse videtur" (Miiller omitted 
Ka6(X7r€p, and took on to be the neut. of oo-ris. Schanz also 
prints o, n, but keeps KadaTrep. Both these readings put too 
much weight on yiyvofievov, and even so do not straighten out 
• the construction.) 

c 7. vofjLTJs refers to the distribution of money as well as of 
land : " dissension about land, about the cancelling of debts, and 
about the distribution of property." (Wagner believes that vo/x-^s 
means pasture here ; most interpreters take it to apply to y-qs 
only.) 

C 8. r/v : although in grammar this probably agrees with epiv, 
it is really the subject of dispute rather than the dispute itself 
about which the city is called upon to legislate — either in a con- 
servative, or a liberal spirit. y]v is governed both by voyao^ereio-^at, 
and by eav, and klv€lv. — dvayKao-Oetarj : the compelling cause is 
the discord between the " haves " ajid the " have-nots." 

d 1. TToAet Twi/ apyaluiv, "any old-established state" ; so Ficinus 
and Schneider. The earlier editors, on no MS. authority, inserted 
ovSev, after (xKLvrjTov, for twi' dp^aiwv to depend on. Stallb., 
though abandoning the ovSev, still takes rwv dpya'nnv as a partitive 
gen. with "anything" understood — as at Rep. 445 e — governed by 
kdv and KLvelv, and he may be right. [A.M.A. suggests that 
Twv dpyaiuiv may mean " any of the capital!'^ 

d 2 ff. eux^) 5e . . . Tj^e, " little but an impossible aspiration 
remains, and a slow and cautious change, advancing at long 
intervals by imperceptible degrees, in the following manner," 
eij;)(7;, as at 841 c 7, Rep. 450 d, and elsewhere, is what we might 
call a " Utopian ideal " — in German " ein frommer Wunsch " 
(Stallb.). — The /xerajSijSd^ova-iv, and the klvovvtwv in the next 
sentence, are the same people. 

d 4. T^'Se : the MSS., and almost all editors, write rj 8e, and 
begin the next sentence with it. Burnet riglitly adopts Bekker's 
addition of it, as r/8e, to the previous sentence, — marking it more 
clearly by altering the comma which Bekker placed after it into a 
colon, and putting a comma before it. 

d 5. The early editions, again on no MS. authority, read 
v7rdpx€L — and so Stallb. and Herm. — as verb to rj Se. twv kivovvt(dv 
det . . . virdpyeiv means " (all that remains is) that there should 
be a supply of reformers from time to time (men who, etc.)." rdv 
• KLvovvTOiv is a partitive gen., like that after aAis. According to 

Porson, who reads olkol's for oIkos at Aesch. Ag. 961, w^e have 

504 



NOTES TO BOOK V . 736 d| 

there mrdpyjei rwi/Se iu the same sense : " there is a store of those 
things." For the gen. cp. Aristoph. Ach. 184 crvveAeyovro twv 
XiOiiiv. (Badham suggests altering vTrdp\€LV into avr' dpxv'^') 

d 6. Stallb. rightly points out that rovroyv does not agree with 
iOeXovTwv, but is a part. gen. depending on rots d7ropovfX€voL<s. It 
is the specially distressed among their debtors who excite the pity 
of the liberal-minded rich. 

e 2. ve/xo/x€i/ovs : the middle voice is peculiar. At 739 e 8 
v€t/xacr^cov, and at 740 a 2 vefxeaduyv are used of the community 
dividing up its own property among its own members : here it 
seems to mean "sharing their property with them." (Badham 
suggests that we ought to read dTrove/jLopLcvovs : the middle of this 
compound is used at Epinomis 991 b in an active sense.) — The four 
ace. participles are quite in order, as agreeing with the subject to 
KOLvu}V€Lv — which is used absolutely. — Plato's favourite chiasmus 
again : rd p\v d<f>. refers to the debts, rot Se v€/a. to the gift of land ; 
these two subjects were mentioned in the reverse order at d 5. 
— a/xy yk TTTj . . . riyov/x€vovs, " they manage to show regard for 
moderation, and act from a conviction that poverty consists . . ." 
Cp. Arist. Fol. ii. 1266 b 29 /xaXkov yap Sel rds €7r6^v/xias 
op.aX.L^€Lv rj Ttts OTJcrtas, tovto 8* ovk ccttl fxr) TraiSevofxevoLS LKavoJs 

VTTO TlOV v6p,(OV. 

e 4. aioTrjpias dp)(^rj ttoAccos p.€yi(rTrjj "the surest source of civic 
well-being." 

e 5. avTQ : i.e. the true estimate of property — especially the 
repression of aTrAr/crria — not necessarily perpLorr^s, though it would 
come to much the same. 

e 7. ry TOtavTrj KaracrTacret : i.e. "for conditions so desirable as 
those above described." 

737^1- The words tt]? /xerajSao-ews have given much 
difficulty. Ficinus boldly translates TavTrjs r. jx. by hoc funda- 
mento, and Herm. {De vestig. p. 27) concluded that Ficinus had 
read and Plato written /3d(reo}<s, and not /iera^ao-ccos (Schanz 
accepts this). Ficinus's translation, however, does not prove either 
that he read rrjs fBda-em';, or that he translated pLeTal3d(reit)<; by 
fundamento. He may have read simply raiVi^s Sc (Ta6pd<i ovcrr]<s, 
and supplied Kp'q7rL8o<s in thought from the context. The scribe of 
A may well have had two readings before him, for before pera- 
jSacrews there is a gap filled with two dummy letters. I would 
suggest that Plato wrote the simple Tavrrjs, and that this was 
interpreted by one commentator to stand for KaracrTacrews (and 
rightly so) ; and by another for Kpyj-rrlSos, for which he substituted 

505 



737 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the to him more familiar word /^cta-ews ; this last was, owing to a 
remembrance of what was said at d 3, corrected to /xera/^ao-ew?. 
It is to be noticed that rjv in a 2, " the thing which we (in 
Magnesia) are escaping," fits in better as referring to an unsound 
political condition, than as to a rotten political foundation ; Tavrrys 
then would refer to Karao-racrews. (Schneider, Stallb., Wagn., and 
Jowett make the best they can of /xeraySao-ews in the sense of 
change — " laborante hoc transitu^^' etc. — the " change " being, ace. to 
Ritter, that from inequality of possessions to equality.) — ovk 
evTTopos rj TToXiTiKr) Trpa^LS ytyvoLT av, " the statesman's course 
will be full of difficulty." 

a 2. fxera ravra : i.e. after an itnsound condition has been 
established. — Most editors now adopt Bekker's ovde/xt^ for the 
MS. ovSe jjiia. 

a 3. rjv ktX. : see above on e 7 and c 6. — o/xws 8e , . . <jivyrjv, 
" for all that, it is just as well to have it explained how we should 
have contrived to escape it, if we had not been so fortunate." 

a 5. Many recent editors rightly adopt Ast's Sry vvv for the 
MS. St) vvv; for vvv is unnatural when introducing a recapitulation. 
— The MS. reading Stot tov /xr) cf)iX.o)(^py]fiaT€Lv /xera Slktj's may 
quite well stand for "by means of absence of avarice, combined 
with justice," and it has this advantage over the (easier) reading 
(fitX. fxer' dStKias, suggested by Heindorf, and adopted by Schanz, 
that — as below at 747 b 7, and as implied above at 736 e — avarice is 
thus hy itself declared to be a danger, whether satisfied justly or not. 
Heindorf s reading would confine the blame to unjust gains ; and 
so would have the same effect as the ecKy added by later hands to 
St. Matth. V. 22 ttoi? 6 opyL^o/xevos rw a.8e\(f>(o avrov 'evo)(o<i ecrraL 
ry Kpicret ; in both cases the commentator seeks to modify the moral 
censure of what is an ordinary state of mind. — The sentence intro- 
duced by elpyja-Od) 8yj vvv is recapitulatory : he restates (1) the vital 
importance of perpLorys in the words pera SiVt^?, and (2) the deadly 
danger of dTrXija-Tta ttX-ovtov in the words 8ta tov prj <^iXo\pripa- 
reti/. So too at b 2 he restates the impossibility of going further in 
the lawgiver's work until this danger has been removed (see e 5 
above). 

a 6. aXXi) . . . Siafjivyy], " and there is no other way of 
escape, broad or narrow, than such a plan as that." As (fivyyv 
avT7J<s has occurred in the previous sentence, there is no need here 
to specify what the escape is from. Badham maintains that Plato 
must have written pyyavr] 8La(f>vyrj<; — and Schanz agrees — but to 
say, as he does, that a pyixavi] can be described as " broad or 

50G 



NOTES TO BOOK V 737 a 

narrow " because it is equivalent to 680s, is only less preposterous 
than to hold, with Ast, that by ix7])(^avrjs Siacfivyy) Plato meant us 
to understand ixrjxavr) 8ta<^vy^9. (Stallb. takes rrjs TOLavTr)<s 
fj.rjxavrj's as a gen. of definition with Stacfivyij : " effugium quod 
tali machina effici possit.") Plato often makes aAAos govern 
a gen. 

b 1. e/5/xa, " prop," varies the metaphor used above in K/jr/TriSo?. 
has preserved for us the reading Set, though the scribe altered 
it to 8r]. On Schanz's theory that is merely a copy of A, 
we should have to suppose, not only that the scribe of hit 
on the right reading by mistake, but also recognized it as a 
mistake. Ficinus's oportet shows that he too read Set. 

b 2. dkkrjXovs is said of the possessors who are implied in 
ov(TLa<s ; a characteristic boldness of expression. 

b 3 ff . 17 /At) . . . fi^rrj : in this rather confused sentence I adopt 
Ast's cKovTas for the MS. cKovra, the universally accepted f of the 
early editions for the MS. rj, after ofs, and (like Burnet) follow 
Bitter in rejecting the /cat before ocrots, which was first questioned 
by Stallb. — " Otherwise all men of any sense will refuse to go 
forward with the arrangement of the constitution for citizens who 
have long-standing disputes with each other (about property)." 

b 4. The gen. Karaa-Kevrjs depends on el<s Tov/xTrpocrOcv as in 
TToppu) (To<fiia<s at Euthyd. 294 e. — For the poetical rel. with bare 
subj. cf. Goodwin, M. and T. § 540. Ast, followed by Schanz, 
inserts av before -q^ but not before p-^rfj — as ocroi? and ois have 
different antecedents, it is hard to see why not. 

b 5. The Kttt before ocrots may well have been due to the idea 
that the two relatives had the same antecedent. 

b 7 f . uAAt^Aovs is used of the whole population of Magnesia, 
including the three (self- constituted) legislators ; TovTovSy like oh 
and T^/xtv in b 5, of the three legislators alone. For one reason, 
oLKL^eLv is much more naturally used of the founding authority, 
than of the populace of the colony. Where that is spoken of — 
as it is at 708 b 3 — the middle oiKt^ecr^at is used. 

b 9. I.e. " no human being could be at once so mad and bad as 
that" or "no human being, however vile, could be guilty of 
such folly as that " — i.e. as to stir up strife, where it did not exist, 
by dividing land unfairly. In other words, even the most incom- 
petent and misanthropical of legislators would never make arrange- 
ments which would be sure to cause dissension. 

C 2. A's avTwv here, like the avrots of all MSS. at c 4 (which 
was probably meant to go with ai/o/xoAoy7/Tcov) assumes that 

607 



737 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

arrangements are to be made by the whole populace, instead of 
by the three lawgivers now consulting. Boeckh corrected the 
first error, and Herm. the second. (The avrov of L and is 
merely a copyist's error of a very ordinary kind.) — oyKov tov 
dpLdfjiov, " numerical amount," like oyKos ttXtjOovs at c 6. 

c 5. For eiTL c. ace. describing distribution among cp. Od. tt 385 
SacradfjievoL Kara ixolpav €(/> r^/xea§, and Frot. 322 d rj ctti Travras 
vet/AO) ; similarly at Tim. 23 b dpia-rov {ykvoi) kir dvOpcoTrovs 
means " noblest among men." So we speak of spreading a gift, or 
a charge, over a number of people. 

C 6. oyKos 8r) ktA. : the two points to be taken into account 
in fixing the number of heads of families are (1) the size of the 
territory, and (2) the necessity of having a population large enough 
to take its place among the surrounding states. The latter con- 
sideration fixes the limit downwards, the former upwards. But 
instead of saying, as we should expect : " you must not have a 
larger population than your territory will support," he says, in 
effect, " you must remember (when you are estimating the capacity 
of your territory) that only enough need be allowed to each man 
to satisfy moderate desires." 

As to this sentence I thoroughly agree with Stephanus in two 
important points : (1) that 7ro(rov<^ is the indeterminate pron. 
(like TTorepiiiv at 628 b 7), and (2) that the sense demands that 
8d should be supplied mentally from TrpocrSet. Those who accent 
TToa-ovs, and make the question a double one, — " how much land 
will support how many ? " — imply that the amount and the nature 
of the territory available is yet to be ascertained ; while TrAetovos 
. . . TrpocrSeL sinks into a mere parenthesis. But the previous 
sentence implies just the opposite of this : i.e. that our decision as 
to the number of the people must depend on the size of the land. 
It is as if a man, after saying, " you must cut your coat according 
to your cloth," went on to say, " we must calculate how much 
cloth will make a decent coat." (Ficinus read ttoo-ovs, for he 
translates " ut tot moderatis hominibus sufficiat." So too Jowett.) 
— As to the second point, I would (mentally) add Set even if 
reading yfj with A or yyj with Schneider and Burnet and L and 0, 
i.e. I would supply ravTrjs tyjs yrjs (Set) as an antecedent to 
oTToa-rj. I think, however, that the Aldine correction of yyj — or 
yfj as A — to yrj^ gives us the true reading. This brings it into 
line with 7rXrjdov<s Se at d 2, with which we must supply Set a\»o. 
— Possibly the i in A's y^t is a mistake for c. 

Between TroXecs and y^s pev I can see no gap in the sense such 

508 



NOTES TO BOOK V 737 c 

as Badham discerns — only the ordinary explanatory asyndeton. — 
(At Aristotle, Pol. ii. 1265 a 18 ff., where he seems to be referring to 
Plato's two considerations as here given, I suspect we ought to 
read tt/oos re tyjv \ii)pav Kal tovs <'y€tTi^t(oi'Tas> di>dp(07rovs ; for he 
proceeds to suggest as an addition to what Plato had said, Kat 
Trpos Tov<s yctTvtwvTtts TOTTOus, i-e. he thinks Plato ought to have 
considered the kind of country the neighbours inhabited, as well as 
(the numbers and character of) the neighbours themselves.) 

C 7. X€)(0€L<s here and Aeyw/xei/ at 738 a 2 have the meaning 
"choose" {pace L. & S. s.v. Aeytu B). 

d 6. €py(^ Kat koyoLs : i.e. we shall not only make such 
settlements as to number and size of lot as the circumstances 
warrant, but we shall give the reasons for them. — vvv Se ktX., "on 
the present occasion (when we have none of the necessary details) 
all we can do is to complete the outline of the legislator's task." 
I do not think he means here (as Wagner), " we will leave this 
subject in outline and proceed to the task of making laws so as 
to complete our discourse." iva TrepatvrjTai belongs, I take it, to 
crxi]fx. €V. K. viroy pa<f>r]Sf and I would take away the comma 
which separates them in all editions. The subj. of wep. is 
vo/xo^€o-ia, not Aoyos. — For the a-yr^ixaros and the viroy pacfirjs Ast 
well cps. Rep. 548 c f. ws Aoyw (T)(7]fJLa TroAiTeia? viroypdxpavTa purj 
(iKpif^ws direpydcracrOaL. 

e 1-e 7. " Let there (be assumed to) be — to choose a convenient 
number — 5040 landholders — men ready to fight for their land. 
Likewise let the land and dwelling-places be divided so as to 
make the same number, — man and portion of land making a pair. 
First then let the whole number be divided by two, and next by 
three ; in fact (ydp) the number admits of divisions by four, and 
five, and all numbers up to ten without a break." 

e 3. Ttt avrd p^pT], like TeTrapa and TrkvTc (peprj) at e 6, are 
ace, while the 8vo p-epr) in e 4 and the Tpia in e 5 are nom. 

e 4. crvvvop.7], the MS. reading, seems to mean a lot which 
counts as one single division ; here it is "a pair." Ast's suggested 
(rvvvop.a, the adj., would give the same sense, but would not be 
quite so explicit ; yevop^cva crvvvop,a would be " counting together." 
— What follows seems to be merely advice to the lawgiver to 
familiarize himself with the various groups into which his whole 
number may be divided. 

e 6. I would, with Schanz, adopt Stephanus's correction of 
the MS. To»' avTov into tov avrov, so as to retain the same 
construction for rpua as for Svo ; for if tov avrov is right, 

509 



737 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

dpiOfMov, and not Xoyov, as Ast suggests, must be supplied with 
it. — (Ritter thinks that the divisions by two and three are 
laid down as imperative, whatever whole number be selected by 
the lawgiver, and he translates vefirjO-qTio " must be obtainable 
by division" — where he takes the 7r€(jiVK€ yap ktX. to apply only 
to the 5040. He gives as his reason the frequent occurrence in 
the subsequent civic arrangements of divisions into twelve and 
groups of twelfths. To this division he thinks that by two and 
then by three — i.e. into six — is intended to lead up.) 

738 a 2. Aeyco/jtev 8r] — so A, 0^, and Ficinus's dicamus — is " let 
us choose etc." ; Xeyofxev Srj — so L and — "we choose etc." 

a 4. 6 Tras (dpidjxos) here is evidently not the same as tov 
TravTos dpiO/xov at e 5 above — for that is 5040, and this is 
contrasted with 5040 — but *^the complete number" Ficinus's 
" universus numerus," perhaps we might say " the ideal whole 
number " [" number in general," F.H.D.], " the unlimited numerical 
series " [" infinity " A.M.A.], " totam numerorum seriem," Ast. 
This is obviously impossible. He will have to content himself 
with one which admits of "no more than fifty-nine different 
factorizations" (which, I am told, is the case with 5040. It is 
also pointed out to me that 5040 = 1x2x3x4x5x6x7). 
The ov TrXetovs in a 7 accounts for the adversative 5e in 
a 4, and is manifestly inconsistent with the absurd correction of 
the first 6 in a 4 to ov, which is adopted by Boeckh, Ast, 
Wagner, Hermann and Schanz. (Grynaeus in his "correction" 
of Ficinus's version translates as if he read ov fxev 8r) in a 4, and it 
is curious to read in Serranus's translation, side by side with 
Stephanus's Greek text 6 fiev 8rj it as, " neque enim omnis numerus." 
(Boeckh, p. 54, to support the neg., quotes from the "corrected" 
Ficinus.) — els Trdvra, "for all purposes"; so €ts ttoXc/xov Kal 
ocra ktX. in the next line. Cornarius unaccountably translates it 
as masc, "m quemvis" (Inumerum). 

a 6. Trpos diravTa rd (TVixf^oXaia kol KOLViovrjixaTa : these 
words come in very awkwardly after oo-a /car* cip^v-qv. I suspect 
they were the marginal comment of someone who was thinking 
of the necessity of arithmetic for business purposes. " Business 
engagements and dealings " are not spheres in which the multiple 
divisibility of men's total number — i.e. varied grouping — is of 
special importance. But it is of great importance in arranging 
(1) an army and (2) the collection of taxes or the distribution 
(Stavo/xwv) of state allowances. (Cobet rejected kol Koiv(Di/r]/xaTa, 
thinking k. a gloss on crv/x/?. — Cp. Rep. 333 a avjxfBoXata Se Xeyeis 

510 



NOTES TO BOOK V 738 a 

KotviovT^fiaTa, rj Tfc akXo. — Ficinus for x/obs aTrai/ra (ra) has " ad 
contraria omnia " ; can he have read tt/oo? rdvavTia Trai'ra, of 
which our text is an explanation ? Cf. Xen. Mem. iii. 12.4 iravra 
ye TavavTta trv/z^atvet.). 

b 2. " These nnmerical relations must be seriously studied and 
clearly comprehended by men whose business it is to do so — they 
will find it just as I say — moreover the founder of a city needs to 
have his attention called to them, and I will tell you why." The 
reason is then explained to be that it is of the highest importance 
— to put it into modern language — that the number of parishes 
should coincide with the actual number of patron saints already 
venerated by the people, and that every opportunity be taken to 
localize and keep alive religious sentiment. The number 12 
which he recommends below at 771 b for the tribes, is chosen 
ostensibly because the Olympian deities were twelve in number ; 
but Plato may well have had in mind the thought that it was 
perhaps some wise old arithmetician who fixed on 12 for the 
number of the deities, because it was such a convenient number 
for human divisions. Number was itself, in a way, a sacred thing 

to Plato. — Kai emphasizes Kara crxoX-jv For ^e/i^atws \af3eiv cf. 

Xen. Cyr. iii. 3. 51 Xaf^elv B' iv rats yviofiais /SefSatoi^ tovto. 

b 3. cx^' y^P ^^^ ^^'^ aAA(u9 r) Tavrrj : these words should be 
marked off, as by Stallb., as a • parenthesis ; i.e. the comma, which 
Schn. and Burnet put after Tavry, should be a colon. Cf. 771 c 5 
w? 8 (ittIv Tavra aXry^to? oVra, Kara (T\o\rjv ovk av iroXvs Ittl- 
Sii^eiev fxvdos, where, as here, we are assured that study will prove 
the truth of what has been said. 

b 4. The following Se is not violently adversative ; the contrast 
is between the study of the facts by the proper officials, and the 
recognition of them necessary on the part of the city-founder. (I 
see no need to assume any lacuna in this passage, as has been done 
by Badham, Bruns, and Schanz.) Further on, b 5-c 7 enjoins on 
the voiio6kTr]<i the supreme importance of preserving every avail- 
able feeling of veneration existing in his citizens, no matter whence 
obtained, and this injunction is summed up in the words tovtwv . . . 
ovSev KLvrjT€OV at c 7. Then with to6? fxipediv eKaa-TOLS the 
arithmetic is brought into colinexion with religion. Each tribe 
must be provided with a patron deity, and a " God's acre " of its 
own, to serve as a centre and type of its corporate and social life. 

b 7. S)VTLvu)v €7rovofMd^€(r6aL Oewv : Theseus's promise to Heracles 
at Eur. H.F. 1329 furnishes an example both of the relation 
described and of the grammatical construction : ravr' €7rojvo/xa(r/x€va 

511 



738 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

aWeUj TO XoLTTov €K fSpoTMv K€KX.rj(TeTaLj only there ravra is 
reixevT] instead of Upd, as here.- — iSpvcrdaL applies to the case of a 
newly founded city ; eTrovofxd^ecrdaL to that of a regenerated old one. 

C 1. ocra €K AekcfiMv ktX.. : it seems best to take ocra as governed 
by eTretcrei/ 6 Oeos to be supplied from the following eVeio-av. 

C 2. oirrjSi] . . . Bewv, " in whatever way they persuaded people 
— whether telling of visions of the Gods which had appeared, or of 
an inspired message delivered from heaven." 

C 3. X.€xOeL(T7]<i : not " qui dicitur " Stallb,, angehliche (Wagn.), 
or " reputed " (Jowett), but " reported" Oedv belongs to both clauses ; 
either the Gods themselves appeared on the spot where they wished 
a temple to be built, or they inspired a man with the knowledge 
of their preference, and he " reported " it. (Herm. unnecessarily 
rejects Treto-avres in c 2, — and so Schanz.) — With Tretcravres Se the 
subject changes from the old-time stories, to the old-time men 
(veteres Fie), who told them. So, as Stallb. points out, at 761 be, 
the subject changes from vdiraL to dvOpiniroL, though there the 
gender of the participles in agreement with the diiferent subjects 
gives an indication of the change. (I do not see why Stallb. 
postpones this change of subject to KaOtepcocrav instead of making it 
begin at once with KaTecrr-qo-avro.) 

C 5. Kadupiiicrav 8e : Se is not adversative, but introduces an 
amplification of the preceding statement. — " And moreover, by such 
stories they gave sanctity to oracles, and images, and altars, and 
shrines, and provided each of these with a piece of consecrated 
ground." For <^rifX7] in the sense of seat of a7i oracle cp. Eur. Hel. 
820 (fiyjixyj rts otKCxiV €V ^i;)(ots ISpvfievrj. 

d 3. TvpioTOis : i.e. before any portions of land are assigned to 
human occupants. 

d 6. €LS T€ Tot's )(peLas €Kd(jTa<s evjxdpecav TrapaarKevd^wa-L : as 
the subject of Trapaa: is not the same as that of the next verb, it is 
better to put a comma after it. These words are generally taken 
to mean " may provide opportunity for the satisfaction of all kinds 
of needs," but Ficinus took them to mean " may provide opportunity 
for the discharge of all the services they can render {et facultatem sui 
facilius ad quoslihet usus exhiheant "). — Is it possible that the words 
mean " (not only) provide facilities for the several religious 
functions" ? [" No. " F.H.D.] 

d 7. (faXoffjpoviovTai : again there is a (slight) change of subject, 
from the meetings to the citizens engaging in them. — /xctol Oixtlmv, 
" thanks to the sacrifices " ; for this use of /xcTa see above on 
720 d 7. ("Vermogen der Opfer." Wagn.). — otKetwvTai Kal 

512 



NOTES TO BOOK V 738 d 

yviofji^oio-Lv : hendiadys, "become intimately acquainted with one 
another." Cp. 953 a 7 iirL/jLeXeLO-daL kol Try/xeAetv. 

e 1. ov fxet^ov ov^€v . . . •f^ : " Frequens hie Graecis est mos post 
genitiviim comparative junctum rj inferendi " (Heindorf on Gorg. 
500 c, where he quotes, among this and other passages, Dem. 
Phil. i. p. 43 TL yap av y^uotro tovtov Katvorepov rj Ma/ceSwi/ 
dvrjp KaTaTToXefJLuiv tyjv 'EAAaSa ;) 

e 5. eV Trpos €v TouTo, " this among all objects " ; litotes for 
" this above everything." Cp. above 647 b, and 705 b. 

739 a-e. To understand this very difficult passage it will help 
us if we go back to 737 a, where we were told that it is 
"opOoTepov" — here, at a 6, it is opdorarov — to consider the 
possibilities under less favourable circumstances than those actually 
to be enjoyed by Cleinias's prospective fellow-citizens. The Tptrrj 
TToAfcTeta (as he here calls it) is a general name for all such inferior 
arrangements as either the invincible conservatism of a lawgiver, 
or the unfavourable circumstances of a community may render 
necessary. The Sevrepa TroXireia marks the first, and a moderate, 
deviation, in the same direction, from the perfection of the ideal 
state. Generally speaking, we shall find that Cleinias's new city 
will be in a condition to adopt this second best constitution (cp. 
below 807 b c), but the Athenian will not dogmatize ; he will have 
done his duty when he has laid all the possibilities before Cleinias, 
and left him to choose between them. 

a-b 1. " The next move that I am going to make in my 
process of lawgiving — a move like that of the desperate draught- 
player who has to abandon his " sacred " line — is of an unusual 
kind, and may cause surprise at the first hearing. Still, reflection 
and experience will make it clear that a city is likely (av) to attain 
to (only) a second-best constitution. Possibly people whose only 
conception of a lawgiver is that of an arbitrary dictator, will say 
I ought to have given them something better. No ; the right 
course is to set forth the best constitution, the second-best and the 
third-best, and leave the choice between them to the authority 
who is responsible for the community in question." 

a 1. The (popd — the "move" for which he apologizes — is the 
abandonment of ideal perfection, and is well typified by the 
draughtman's abandonment of the " sacred " middle line on the 
board. 

a 3. I would put a full stop at Troi^creLev. 

a 4. Attention must be paid to the ai-' with otKeta-OaL : he does 
not say, " it will appear that a ttoXls is being constituted," but " is 
VOL. I 513 . 2 L 



739 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

in danger of being constituted," "^s likely to be constituted '' (cp. 
790a5 7r/o6s tw /x,r) edeXetv av TreiOecrOai). All translators and 
commentators ignore the av, except Stallb. wbo translates by a 
fut. infin. He takes the sentence to mean : " apparebit secundo 
loco conditam civitatem conditum iri ita ut ad id quod est optimum 
temperetur et conformetur ; " in other words, " that the second- 
best " will turn out the best ; which is too paradoxical. — tt/jos to 
^kXridTov is best taken as a qualification and explanation of 
8€VT€/0(os ; cp. d 4 vrrep/SoXy Trpos dpcnii'. — (Badham's ov^ ere/ows 
for 8evT€po)s simplifies the immediate context at the expense of the 
general sense of the passage ; avri^v in the next sentence would 
then have nothing to stand for but " a well-conBtTncted state," and 
this is not what we want.) 

a 5. At first sight it seems more natural to take Stot to /jlt] 
(rvvrjOes to mean " owing to the unsuitability (of the second con- 
stitution) to a lawgiver who is not absolute " ; but the fxrj crvvrjOes 
recalls the di^Orjs ovcra of a 2, and suggests that (as the tis here is 
the same person as the aKovovra there), it may mean, " owing to 
the want of familiarity (on the part of Tts) with a lawgiver who 
leaves anything to a people's choice." This second interpretation 
suits the general idea of the passage better. Ficinus takes it so : 
" quia consuetus non fuerit cum legumlatore more tyrannico in- 
ferendis legibus non utenti." 

b 3. These are not the headings of separate divisions of the 
succeeding portion of the work. The author here gives us to 
expect that, with a view to the practical utility of the work, he 
will often give alternative enactments on the same subject. Ritter 
(p. 146) has collected several instances of such alternatives, Cp. 
especially the alternatives at 740 ef. 

b 4. I have adopted Burnet's correction of the MS. av etTroTc 
to del 7roT€. 

b 5. Kara tov eavTov rpoirov . . . TrarptSos, " to choose in 
accordance with his own disposition such of his native institutions 
as are to his taste." In other words, familiarity will sometimes 
count more than abstract excellence. 

bSff. What Plato here says is this : "Although the (f)opa dc/)' 
lepov has been made — although it has been admitted that some of 
the enactments now to be suggested are incompatible with the 
ideal constitution described in the Republic — for all that, the only 
proper test of the excellency of any provision or enactment will be 
this : how nearly does it approach that ideal ? " The vigorous 
denunciation of selfishness in all its forms which we have already 

514 



NOTES TO BOOK V 739 b 

had at 731 d 6 — 732 b 4 is quite in the same tone. — The practical 
result of the <f)opd here is that Cleinias is to be allowed to retain 
the institutions of (1) the family, and (2) private property — though 
with limitations. 

c 1. The mention of the proverb (see Rep. 424 a and 449 c) 
makes it quite clear that Plato is here explaining the relation of 
liis present disquisition to the Republic, and the theories there 
propounded. The old theory is here reaffirmed in the most im- 
pressive manner, but I think we should not be wrong in reading 
between the lines an indication of the different circumstances 
under which the two treatises were conceived. The Republic was 
more than half philosophical speculation : the Laws has a practical 
object, i.e. (1) the suggsetion of a polity such as might be adopted 
by a new state under favourable circumstances, and (2) the reforma- 
tion of existing laws. 

C 2. Aeyerat Se ws, " the saying is that . . ." — oVtws is the 
philosopher's addition to the proverb : there is a deeper meaning 
in it, he implies, than people suspect. 

C 3. TovT ovv ktA. : the resumption of this which begins at d 6 
— etre ttov . . . , and the conclusion there — suggest that he began 
this sentence with the intention of saying : "This state of things, 
whether possible or not, is the true way to happiness." But the 
details of the ideal scheme made him forget the form in which the 
sentence began, and he finishes by saying that the laws (d 3) which 
breathe this same spirit are only excellent in so far as they do so. 

C 4. The ace. c. inf. clauses — €tvai goes in sense with the first 
and third as well — are in apposition to tovto. Burnet, by 
marking off Kotvas . . . crvinravTa as a parenthesis, makes it 
quite unnecessary, with Steph. and Stallb., to change the indica- 
tives in c 6 into infinitives ; these verbs must have el supplied 
with them from the previous ciVe . . . etVe. 

C 5 ff. " And if all means have been taken to eradicate utterly, 
from all sides of our life, wliat we mean by calling a thing one^s 
own, and if means have been devised to secure that, as far as jjossible, 
even what nature has made our own should somehow become common 
property — I mean that our very eyes and ears and hands should 
seem to see, hear, and act as if they belonged not to us alone but 
to all of us — and if again we have all been brought to praise and 
blame, as far as possible, in unison, and to be pleased or pained at 
the same things on the same occasions." 

c 7 f . The infins. yeyovkvai, 8ok€lv, iTratveiv, and xpeyeiv depend 
on n€fj,r^)(avYjTau 

515 



739 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 8. KOLvdj " communem in usum" (Fie). 

d 3. Kttt is denique (Ficinus and Stallb.). — Kara Svvafiiv 
oTt /jidkicrTa : the usual pleonasm. 

d 5. dXXov : i.e. " no one will find any other criterion of superior 
excellence for laws (tovtidv) " than the knowledge how far they 
serve the purpose of binding the community together by a common 
interest. (There is much that is attractive in Ficinus's way of 
taking tovto)v as dependent on dXXov — " any definition of perfect 
excellence other than (all) this " — " this " being its doing away wdth 
lSlov, and putting kolvov in its place. — But then he has to "go 
round " the otVtves vo/xot clause, which he translates : " ac denique 
(si) pro viribus sub his legihus vivant quae unam quam maxima 
civitatem efliciunt " ; the " vivant " is not in Plato. — Badham's 
^ryrouvra?, which he imagines to have fallen out after aTre/aya^^ovrai, 
provides a construction for oiVives vo/jlol ktX., but introduces a 
foreign element into the passage. tovtwv then for him, as for 
Ficinus, will be "all these conditions" — "all this unity." He 
would also read v7r€pf3oXrj<s for vTrep^oXrj ; I imagine he made 
TovTiov depend on dXXov and vTrepfSoXrjs on opov. I see no reason 
for the latter change, but (rjTovvTas — after -^ovTac — should be 
carefully considered. On the whole, I prefer the MS. text. 

d 6. TToAts is left " pendens." (Badham would reduce this to 
order by reading el for i), and then ecrri ttoi;, Oeol 8\ for eiVe ttov 
deol.) — For r/ after etVe cp. below 862 d 4 eiVe epyois •>) Aoyots. 

d 7. [TrAetoi^s €vos] : apparently, as we should say, " two or 
more," " a few," — for there must be at least two to form a com- 
munity — but it is a strange phrase. — Possibly oIkov(tl means not 
inhabit, but manage. If so we must supply " its citizens " with 
Sta{'c3i/T€s. Anyhow we are meant to infer that superhuman con- 
ditions may be necessary for the realization of the perfect polity. 
I think that the TrXecovs evos, — which also agrees with TratSes 
understood — in 740 c 3, has got in here by mistake. It is not 
unlikely that in some MS. the two passages were the length of a 
column apart, and so might have stood side by side on a page. 

e 1. dXXr], " alibi " (Fie). 

e 4. dOava(TLa<s ky^vjaTo, kol rj puia SevrepiDS : so the MSS. ; 
we may well believe, he has suggested, that only divine natures 
could support the perfect polity. " The polity which we have 
now set ourselves to evolve in our conversation is the nearest 
approach we can get to the divine conditions, and is (only) in the 
second degree the (really) one state we spoke of" — " si non primo, 
certe secundo loco erit una " (Fie). It must be admitted that, in 

516 



NOTES TO BOOK V 7396 

spite of the apparent reference to the fxtav of d 3 above, the 
utmost significance to be got out of rj fiia is small. (Can it 
mean "a united state"?) Perhaps Apelt's suggestion (p. 10), to 
read ri/xia for it, gives us what Plato wrote. (Heindorf removes 
the comma before etr) and puts one after av, reading eirj ye ai/, in 
the sense of "is a possible one." Schanz supposes rj /xia to be a 
mistaken interpretation of d"^, i.e. Tr/awTo^?, which he actually 
prints : " next nearest to the divine and the first polity.") 

e 5. This must not be taken, I think, to mean that the author 
proposes to furnish a complete polity and set of la\\s for the con- 
ditions which admit of only the " third -best " polity. — He does 
not definitely propose that, even for the " second-best " conditions. 
— The word StaTrc/aatvetv (without some such word as TravreAws) 
does not always mean to complete ; e.g. at Tim. 89 e to 8' €v 
Trapepyio . . . SiaTre/oavatr' av is opposed to St' dKpL/3eLa<i . . . 
Siekdelv ; at Gorg. 451 a rrjv aTroKpicTLV i)v rjpo/xrjv ^lairkpavov only 
means " favour me with the answer to my question." Cp. also 
790 c 3 below. (For Trepaivetv^ "perform," of music, or a dramatic 
representation, see Adam on Rep. 532a; used of a speech it is 
" deliver" cf. Plut. Mor. 1 30 a.) What he here contemplates is 
the furnishing his hearers^ when the opportunity occurs, with speci- 
mens of such legislation as will be wisest in conditions still further 
removed than the " second-best " from " the ideal." (See above 
on 739 b 8.) 

e 6. TavTr]v is the " second-best " polity. — rtVa . . . kol ttws 
yevofxevyjv av roLavry]V recalls the introductions to the descrip- 
tions in the Republic of the oligarchical and other constitutions and 
characters; Rep. 548 d6. tis . . . ttw? re yevo/xevos and 553 a 3 
(OS T€ yiyverat, ofos re yevd/xevo? cVtiv. 

740 a 1. fJL€L^ov 17 Kara . . . eiprjTai : not " has been declared 
to be too great a task for " but " is a proposal which is too big 
for" — " majus sonat " (Schneider). So at Soph. 226 c 3 ScaipertKa 
irov TO. X€\dkvra icprjTaL is not " have been declared to be con- 
cerned with division," but "are uttered as terms denoting 
division." 

a 2. yevccTLv kol rpocfirjv kol TratSeva-Lv : i.e. the citizens are 
not a picked " strain," like the <j>vX,aK€S of the Republic, nor has 
their early nurture or subsequent training fitted them for the 
" ideal " conditions. 

a 4. Koiv'qv avrr^v ttjs 7rdA.ew9 (ri»/>t7ra(rr/s : to this funda- 
mental principle of ancient and modern law Plato adds two con- 
siderations designed (1) to endear, and (2) to dignify the possession 

517 



740 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

of land. (1) He appeals to patriotic sentiment : — " The country 
of which it is a piece is your native land " ; and (2) he reminds 
his hearers of the fact that the Earth, of which it was also a piece 
— which, at Tim. 40 b c, he calls y?]v Se rpocfiov fxev ^/xerepav 
. . . 7rp<x)Tr]V Kai Trpcirf^vTaTrjv OeMV ocrot tVTos ovpavov yeyovacrt 
— claims allegiance and honour from all mortals. Cp. 877 d 5 ff. 

a 5. Neither the avrrjv nor the Set are necessary to the sense, 
but their repetition gives clearness and importance to the following 
clauses. I would therefore neither expel Set with Stallb., nor 
change it to act with Schanz. 

a 6. Tw Kol . . . yeyovevai : this awkward addition means 
apparently " all the more (ought we to cherish it) because, being 
itself a goddess, it is the mistress of such as are mortal." 

a 7. ravTa . . , Satp.ovas : though in form this is a command 
to extend these sentiments of reverence to all the supernatural 
beings who haunt the country, in effect it serves to bind all such 
religions up into a mutually supporting whole. (I therefore see 
no reason with Usener to reject this passage.) 

b 3. A^ wrote ecm for kcniai ; mistakes like this, and 
vTrep/SdXXiiv (for Trap€fj,/3dXX€iv) at 741 a 3, shake one's confidence 
in the scribe of A. 

b 5. Schanz adopts the Aldine w 8' for the MS. S)S', with a 
comma after ttoXlv. 

b 7. eVa p,6vov Kk-qpovopov : Herm. {De vestigiis etc. p. 23) 
says it is probable that Attic law attempted to restrict the number 
of families to a fixed number, but did not interfere with the size 
of the families. Plato sees that, to do the first, it is necessary to 
do the second as well. 

c 1. OeMv . . . ykvov<i: i.e. his ancestors, called at 717 b 5 
Trarpioiov deMV. I take Kal (yev.) . . . kol (ttoA.) to be " both 
. . . and," and yevoi;? and TroAew? to depend on deiov. Those 
who take the kul before ttoAcws as "and" (Wagn. and Jow.) 
saddle the heir with a great responsibility ; how is he to be the 
depa7revT'q<s "of the city and of all the dead and living citizens"? 
It is not clear how Fie. and Schneider take it. — twi/ re ^lovTiov 
KOI ocrovi ktX. : a comparison of 717 b 5 shows that this 
means all the inheritor's own ancestors, including his parents. 
Apparently the new KX-qpovopios is to enter upon his office 
during his father's lifetime, and ets toi' t6t€ ;)(/3ovov (" up to that 
time") would then be the date of his installation. At 775 e 5 ff. 
we are told that the heir when he marries is to occupy the 
second family residence, i.e. that away from the city. 

518 



NOTES TO BOOK V 74OC 

C 2. Tovs Se aXXovs TraiSas : instead of some verb meaning " to 
dispose of," which we expect to govern the accusatives, we have 
only the two infins. which indicate the special ways in which 
the two sexes are severally disposed of. These infins. replace the 
imperative /caTaAetTreTw. It is not easy to say whether they 
would be felt as imperatives, or whether a Stt was imagined as 
preceding. 

C 4. vo/xov : probably that as to the age of marriage ; cp, 772 d e. 

C 5. ekXeiTry : at 844 b 2 we have a similar impersonal 
tAXeiVet c. gen., /cat cAAetVei twv avajKaioiv Troyixdroiv, and 
Stallb. ops. Dem. De cor. p. 326. 20 <ui/ 8' eveAtTre rfj ttoAcc, ravra 
Trpoa-Oetvat. Ast adopts Steph.'s insertion of rd before t^<» 
yevecrecos, and remarks, with a curious self-contradiction, that 
" when this verb is used impersonally, it must have a subject in 
the nominative." 

C 6. Kara x^pLv : i.e. " among friends," — to such as would be 
glad to have them on personal grounds. (This refers, I think, 
both to the marriage of daughters and the giving away of sons.) 
kdv Se TLO-LV eAActTTcocrtv x^P'''''^'^ will mean " those who have no 
such personal friends" (among the marriageable or the childless). 
The expressions include the notion of a possible personal inclina- 
tion on the part of the daughter or the son. — rj TrAetoi;? eirtyovoL 
ktX. : i.e. if there is a large family of younger children, whether 
girls or boys, it is too much to expect the parents to find new 
homes for them all. 

C 8. TovvavTiov orav €AaTTOvs Sktlv, " when there is a 
deficiency " (lit. " when there are too few children of any parents "). 
This covers the case of those who had only one child, as well as 
that of those who had none. 

d 1. irdvTiov TovTiiiv depends on firj^avi^v in d 3. — dpx'^y '• if 
this word had come third in its clause instead of first, no one 
would have wanted to change it to the nom. (as Schanz does). 
Its position emphasizes it ; calling special attention to the inter- 
vention of the civic magistrate. As a nom. it would not be so 
emphatic, because its position would be an ordinary one. 

d 3. T7 Tot§ cAAetTToucrt : this "bull" is a sacrifice to the desire 
to balance both parts of a sentence against each other, and to the 
preference for the concrete. The Ath. is talking here of the 
superfluity and deficiency in particular families, not (as Ast) in 
the state as a whole. — 7ropL^€T(o ktA. : cf. Rep. 460 a 2 tV (09 
fxaXtcTTa Siacrw^uxrc rov avTov dpidfibv Ttav" dvSpiov. 

d 6 flf. oh, " (to be applied) in the case of those who." (As 

519 



740 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

this word was omitted by the first hand iu A, Schanz omits it.) 
— KOi TovvavTLOv . . . o Xeyo/xev : I do not think that any 
alteration of the MS. reading is necessary here ; but I agree with 
Burnet that, of the many suggested emendations, Winckelmann's 
insertion of at before SvvavraL is the best. But why not take 
re after Ti/>tat§ not as both but as and — connecting elcTLV and 
SvvavTaL ? — eTTifieXetai Kal (rirovSai form a hendiadys — " deliberate 
encouragements." — aTravrwcrai is a difficulty. It seems to be 
used in the same sense as at 830 a 5 et's avrov av drravTiojxev tov 
dy wi/a, i.e. that of " take the field " — here, more particularly, 
" ojoerate,^' — rcfxals and the other datives being instrumental. Both 
€7rtcr^€cr€is and eTrt/xeAetat, not the latter alone, are the subjects of 
^TJvavTai ; Trepl v€ov^ is the equivalent of an objective gen. The 
meaning we may thus get from the MS. reading is : " And on 
the other hand (there are) deliberate encouragements of larger 
families, and (both of these), operating [through the voice of warn- 
ing] by means of honour and disgrace, and the admonition given 
by the old to the young, are able to secure the object above- 
mentioned." The chief awkwardness in this sentence seems to 
me the repetition of the idea of vov6eT7](T€cn in 8ia Aoywi' 
vovOeTrjTLKMv. Is not the latter a marginal comment ? I have 
inserted a comma after elcriv and bracketed Sia Xoyojv vovOerrjriKOiv. 
(aTTai/Two-at is certainly not " respond to " ; there is no notion of 
concord in the Greek aTravrdv, as there is in the English meet — 
Ast turns rt/xat? ktX. to noms., Herm. rejects elcrtv, Badham 
turns it into rccri, Schneider reads Swarai (for SvvavTaL), Schramm 
oLTravTiocrai^, and Schanz aTravras ai Svvai^rat.) 

e 2 ff . In case of the failure of all possible methods for keeping 
the numbers down, we must send out a colony. — 7rao-a, " complete," 
as in the common irdo-a dvdyKT]. 

e 6. virdpx^i', "is at their command." 

e 7. (5v : dependent on aTroiKtcov, " consisting of such people 
as . . ." The Aid. ed. emended o)v to ot, which Schanz adopts ; 
but this substitutes a less important for a more important 
consideration. 

e 8. eav t' . . . kireXdrj ttotc Kvfxa KaTaKXvcrfJLov cfiipov voctov, 
" and if ever a flood of disease comes surging upon them." "We 
have a like metaphorical use of Kv/jia (and KaraKAv^w) at Tim. 43 b, 
and at Rep. 473 c. (Cornarius puts in yj before voo-cuv, and takes 
KVfia and KaTaKXycr/xov literally. Ast, comparing 677 a, 
approves.) 

741 a 3. v66y TratSeta : stronger than the cr/xiKpa TratSeta of 

520 



NOTES TO BOOK V 741a 

735 a 4. There, the education referred to was less stringent and 
complete : here it is " a base imitation " of the education of the 
higher classes. — cKo^ra?, "if they can possibly help it." — For 
Trapcfx/SdWeiv see above on 740 b 3. 

a 4. Cp. 818 d 8, Prot. 345 d, Simonides, Fr. 5. — The string of 
alternatives here concluded furnishes a striking instance of the 
feature of the Laws mentioned on 7 39 b 3. 

a 5. vvv = vvvSrj. — <f)(i}fxev : almost " let us imagine." — rjfxiv 
belongs, as Stallb. says, to tov keyo/xevov Aoyov. As a rule it is 
taken with Trapatvelv. — Here the Aoyos personified appeals — not, 
I think, to the three, nor to the three plus an imaginary group of 
colonists, but — to the imaginary assembly of the new colonists, in 
the same strain as that of the prelude at the beginning of the book. 
I think the speech is supposed to finish at cra^ets in 745 bl. 
Though some new regulations are introduced at 741 e 7, the whole 
passage consists mainly of arguments and explanations designed to 
secure compliance with the regulations as to property. At 744 a 8 
there is a repetition of what was said at 741 b 7 f., which suggests 
that the speaker is still the same. 

a 6 ff . Trjv oiMOLOTtjra . . . Tr/oay/xartuv, " never cease to follow 
Nature in honouring conformity, and equality, and identity, and 
correspondence, whether in number or in any (other) influence 
productive of fair and noble things." — 6/xoAoyov/xevov is middle, 
"that which agrees"; cp. 746 c 8. I agree with Ritter (p. 147) 
that the genitive is objective, and that we are meant to infer that 
apiOfxo^i is a 8vvafj,L<s rwv KaAtuv Kayadcov TrpayfxaTOiv. 

b 4. fxiTpiov is not merely " mediocre " (Fie), or " modest " 
(Jow.) ; it has the notion of symmetry and suitability. He speaks 
as if the amount were a statue of which they are begged " not to 
spoil the true proportions," by adding to or detracting from them 
by trafficking in it. 

b 5. K\7)pos : this was the reading of the first hand in A, and 
0. In both MSS. there is a suggested correction, possibly by the 
original hand, to KXrjpov, v being written over the s. In A the 
s is in an erasure. This suggests that the writer was at first in 
doubt as to which was right. Ficinus's " neque deus ipse dis- 
tributor " leaves us in doubt as to his reading. He may well have 
been in doubt himself. I cannot think that if the original 
reading had been KXrjpov, anyone would have altered it to 
the nom. ; but the very recent use of the word in the sense of 
portion of ground may well have led to the reverse change. At 
690 c 5 Plato speaks of the ruler chosen by lot as deof^tXri. This 

521 



741 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

is quite in accordance with the description of the lot as a minister 
of heaven, and so a ^€o?. Hermann cps. the deification of "OpKos 
at Hes. Theog. 23 L The addition of the u)v marks the word as in 
need of an explanation or reminder. The reminder that the lot is 
divine is in place, but not so the reminder that the previously 
mentioned "distributor" was a God. Evidently kAtJ/jos is right. 
— Burnet marks off ovre yap . . . voyao^err/s as a parenthesis. 
This abruptness makes it a little easier to dispense with the some- 
what complicated verbal notion "will (help you) if you do"; but 
it obscures the connexion with what follows. The law (b 7) and 
the religious consid&i-ations (c 2) definitely refer — in the usual 
chiastic order — to the vo/jlo6€T7]s and the Oeoq of Burnet's 
parenthesis ; so, too, at d 3 afxa vo/xw Kal tm ^eu>. I would 
therefore mark the passage off with colons only. 

b 6 ff. What follows is involved in structure, and consequently 
obscure. irpoiTov (in b 6) seems to correspond with the npos 
TovTOL^ 6' ert at c 8 ; the second rrpioTov (at c 1) with etra at c 2. 
To confirm what he has said of the antagonism of the God, and the 
Law to the recalcitrant citizen, he adds : (1) (b 6 tf.) that the law 
enjoins further that — as he took his land knowing beforehand that 
it was already sacred to the gods, and that it was going to have this 
sacredness ceremonially confirmed — punishment must follow the 
infringement of the original arrangement ; and (2) (c 8 ft".) that 
there was to be constituted a special machinery for inflicting this 
punishment where it was due. 

C 1. 7) jJir) KXrjpovo-dat : this depends on TrpoiLTnov. The law 
had warned this man (who is now unwilling to obey it) that his land 
must either be taken on these particular terms, or let alone. (There 
is therefore no such "bull" here as Stallb. discerns.) 

C 4. Tov Trptafxevov . . . 7racr;(etv does duty 6o</i as the direct object 
oiir poo-TdrTCL in b7 and as an expression of the substance of the prayers 
mentioned in c3; in the latter case it is "will pray that the 
sentence may be duly executed." (Stallb. takes it as dependent 
only on evxas Tron^aofxkvDiv, and translates Trpo<TTarT€t TrpoenriDV 
— regardless of the difference in tense — by ^Hta praescribet ut . . . 
moneat" ; Schneider finds an object for TrpocnaTrei by putting in 
" obedientiam (injungit)." 

c 6. ypd\l/avT€<; — anyliow a break in the construction — must 
agree with the subj. of Karaorr-qfTovo-iv as well as that of dr^crova-i^ 
and therefore I think it describes not the priests, but the legal 
authorities ; this is confirmed by the vop-i^o in d 3. — [Longinus] 
He/at vxj/ovi § 4 rebukes Plato for fantastically calling SeAroi^s 

522 



NOTES TO BOOK V 74I C 

KVTrapLTTLvas /xi/7J/i,as. He might well have blamed him for the 
obscurity of the whole passage. 

C 8. (f)v\aKTrjpLa tovtwv, otto)? av yiyvryrat, KaTacTTr/a-oixrii/ 
e'v . . ,, "will give the duty of seeing the punishment enacted 
to . . ." 

d 2. The use of irapayiDyq for transgression is peculiar. 

d 3. avTOTJS, like the subj. of O-qcrova-L and KaracrT., is the 
legal authorities. — The iVa clauses, coming after oTrtus av yiyv-qraL, 
are somewhat tautological. — Truly 6 deios IIAaTwv, as Longinus 
calls him, has given us an obscure piece of writing to decipher 
here. 

d 4-e 6. 6(Tov yap Srj . . . xP'JH-o-Ta, " how great a boon the en- 
forcement of this policy confers on states which accept it — given an 
organization to correspond — no one can know, as the old saying is, 
while he is uuregenerate. He must find it out by a course of train- 
ing in good habits. In a state organized on this model there are 
no great fortunes to be made — a society in which it is natural that 
men should find it not only unnecessary, but illegal to make money 
by any vulgar trade — witness the way in which a liberal soul 
shrinks from the rej)roach implied in the terms " mercenary," and 
" mechanical" He would as soon think of flying as of amassing 
wealth by such means." — The yap Sr^ introduces a reason for the 
course just prescribed. 

d 5. Tqv kirofikv-qv KaTa(rK€vrjv Trpoa-\af36v : for the permanence 
and success of the equality arrangement, certain conditions are 
necessary. The repetition of the word Karaa-Kem) at e 2 shows 
that what he means by it here is the organization of society in 
such a way as to relieve the fully educated classes from all " illiberal " 
employment or pursuit. 

d 7. KttKos (01/ : the " saying " must have been something like 
ovSet? €t(T€TaL a7ret/309 (ui/ or experientia docet. — As Ritter 
(p. 148) says, this thought is akin to that of 733 a Iff. If 
we shirk the necessary training, we shall never have our eyes 
opened to the glory and advantage of what is good. Somewhat 
in the same strain is Wordsworth's " and you must love him, ere 
to you he will seem worthy of your love " ("A Poet's Epitaph"), and, 
on the positive side, the Gospel saying eav rts OeXrj to BeXyj/j-a 
avTov TTOictv, yvioGreTac Trepl rr}? 8t8a)(^s. Cp. also 968 d 6 ft'. 
— e^eo-t goes, I think, with both €^7r€i/3os and €7rt€iKrys : habit 
is the essence of the training, and also of the resulting virtue. 

e 1. ovT . . . (r<l)66pa : litotes, as sometimes in the case of ov 
Trdvv. 

523 



741 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

e 4. fSavava-La : cf. Ar. Pol. 1337 b 8 /3dvav(Tov 8' €pyov eivat 
Sei TOVTO vo/xt^eiv Kat T€\vr]V Tavrr^v Kal fxdOrjcTLV, oVat 7rpo<s ras 
^pr^cret? Kat ras 7r/9a^eis rots tt}? dperrjs d\p-qa-Tov diripyd^ovrai 
TO crw/xa rtui/ iXevdepiov r^ rrjv ^v^'qv rj rrjv Stavotav, and see 
Adam's note on Rep. 495 e 2. 

e 7. 77/30? TO uTots 8' . . . T0VT019, " thePB is bcsides jct another 
law which goes with all these ordinances." (It is unusual to find 
a phrase repeated so soon in Plato ; cp. c 8 where also we have 

Trpbs TOVTOLS S' €TL.) 

742 a 2. lSmtj) : it is explained at b 2 why the community 
needs money. The community's money would doubtless be of 
gold or silver, whereas the daily uses of internal traffic would be 
served, it is imj)lied, by an inferior currency. 

a 2-5. I can find no complete explanation of this very difficult 
passage. Some light is shed on it by Rep. 371b3-e5, where 
Plato explains why coined money is needed within the state itself. 
He there says (1) the 8r]ixLovpyol want it to facilitate their buying 
and selling intercourse with each other, and (2) it is needed for the 
payment of SidKovot ; he does not say (in the Republic) whether 
these are paid by cf>vXaK€s. or by Sr^juaovpyoL Inasmuch as the 
former are forbidden to have any private property whatever (416 d), 
it is probable that the currency was only to be touched by the 
SrjfiLovpyoL and pLcrOojTOL. So in our passage the aAAay?^ which 
necessitates a currency is spoken of as taking place (1) between the 
Sri/jLLovpyoL^ and (2) between Tracriv ktA. (whoever they are). This 
last point is made clear by the t€ . . . Kai, and is, I think, 
generally ignored. Ast alters ottoctcdv to ottoo-ois, and translates 
" (et omnibus) quibus illo opus est ut mercedem . . . solvant " ; 
Twv ToiovTwv, he says, means money. Stallbaum says ott. . . . 
TOLovTiDV stands, by attraction, for irda-iv toiovtols ottoo-wv XP^^^ 
(eo-Ttv), and means " (quam facere fere necessarium est opificibus) 
atque omnibus istiusmodi hominibus quorum opera utimur.'' Ficinus 
— like the early editors, who put a full stop at IStiJoTr) — did not, 
like the modern editions, take vo/xLcr/xa to be governed by e^elvat 
KeKTrja-Oat understood. His translation though could hardly have 
been made from our text ; it is : " sed quia nummis opus est 
quotidianae commutationis gratia, quae inter artifices et huiusmodi 
ferme est necessarium, cum mercenariis et servis et colonis merces 
aliqua debeatur, iccirco nummos habere concedimus etc." — Badham 
cuts out dAAciTTeo-^ai, and twv tolovt(i)v pl(t6ovs ; but then he 
has to take yjv, i.e. aAAayryv, as the object of ciTroTtVetv, and this 
does not help us. Schanz, so far, has the last word in saying 

524 



NOTES TO BOOK V 742 a 

" locus haud duhie corruptusJ' If driven to translate the text I 
would suggest, for Kal Tranrtv ... aTroTiVetv', "and for all men 
whose function it is to pay, to hired slaves or aliens, wages for 
services of such a kind " — the " services " being spoken of as the 
equivalent of the work produced by other artificers. In this way 
the paying wages for services would be represented as a kind of 
barter. F.H.D. suggests that tQ>v toiovtwv /xwr^ovs = " wages in 
■money " — consisting in vofxio-fia (as opposed to wages in kind) : 
A.M. A. would reject twv rotovTwv. 

a 6. avTots . . . dSoKifioVj " current at home, but worthless 
abroad." 

a 7-b 2. The occasions which take representatives of the state 
abroad are divided into (1) military, and (2) peaceful missions. 
The second class may either go as negotiators (Trpeo-^ets) or mere 
state-messengers (K-rjpvKei). At 950 d 8 a third class of mission is 
added — K-qpv^iv t] Trpecr/^ci'ais -^ Kat tlctl Oeojpols. 

b 1. The first five editions omit all the words between this 
T^ TToAei and that in the next line. Steph. discovered the omission 
too late to include the words in his text. 

b 3. i'o/xto-/xa 'EAA171/1K01/ : this addition is grammatically 
otiose, but welcome in the interests of clearness. Ast rejects it. — 
iStcory 8e : the position of the private traveller is not explicitly 
defined on all points. (1) We may conclude, I think, from what 
goes before, that he had to get leave from the authorities, not only 
to travel, but to employ some of the state fund of Greek currency 
for the purpose. (2) The next question, which is at first sight 
obscure, is what is the vd/xtcr/xa ^eviKov which is (possibly) left in 
his pocket on his return ? Is it some money current only in a 
foreign state, or is it some of the aforesaid vofiicrfia 'EAAiyviKoi/, or 
is it perhaps some " barbarous " coinage ? The answer is, I think, 
that the term ^€vlk6v would apply to all three cases and is meant 
here to do so. (3) We may again conclude, I think, that, though 
we are not told of the transaction, the returned traveller gives 
back, as a matter of course, all he had not spent of the state 
money. But if, over and above this (TTf/oiyei/d/xei/ov), he has in his 
possession some foreign money — either given him by a foreigner, 
or made by him in trade — he must not keep it in this form, but 
must change it into the home (i.e. brass, or copper) currency. This 
regulation might be partly prompted by a fear that the travelled 
citizen might have entered into secret compact with some foreign 
power, for the purposes of which compact the possession of foreign 
currency would be useful. The words do not warrant Ficinus's 

525 



742 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

interpretation that the traveller first changed his foreign money 
and then deposited it in the state treasury. It is to be noticed that 
the penalty of concealment is (b 8) confiscation. This would be no 
penalty if the money was the state's by rights already. 

b 4. The first five printed edd. — and some edd. of Stobaeus, 
apparently — forsake all the Plato MSS. in reading TrapatTrjcrdfjLevos 
for Trapeixevos. There could hardly be a better instance of the 
way in which a marginal interpretation makes its way into the- 
text. 

b 6. irpos Aoyov : apparently in the sense of the more usual 
dva Xoyou ; cf. Dem. Pro Phorm. 954. 19 Trpos /xcyoos and Gorg. 
464 c Trpos TO (SkXTicrTov. 

b 7. The object of ISiovfxevos is not " anything " — e.g. any part 
of the sum of state money borrowed — but the sum of foreign 
money in question. This is made clear by the fact that the fine 
to be paid by the man with the guilty knowledge is to be "not 
less than the sum of the foreign money brought back." 

b 8. dpa KOi dvetSei, " exsecratione et infamia " (Schneider) ; the 
former religious, the latter social. 

c 2. Perhaps the author here imagines himself to be asked : 
" How is a man to marry his daughters if he has no property ? — or 
get security for money lent, if his debtor has no money, or, for 
that matter, how can he lend money at all ? The answer is : 
" The Law will give you no help in either of these latter trans- 
actions ; and it forbids dowries altogether." — The usual chiasmus. 

C 3. The Law wishes to make trade impossible, and therefore 
will not recognize credit. It is suggested at Rep. 556 a that 
that is the best way to prevent the creation of debt in a state : 
€ipyovT€s rd avrov oTrrj tcs fSovXerat Tpeireiv. Cp. also Stob. Flor. 
44. 22 rj hicnrep Xa/ocuvSas koI IIAaTwv ; ovtoi yap irapa^prjpLa 
KcXivovcTi StSovat KoX Xajxf^dv€iv, edv 8e tls TTLarTioarr) fxrj eTvat 
Slktjv, avTov yap aiTiov elvai rrjs aSiKtas. Cf. also below 849 e 8 
6 8e Trpoefxevos ws TrtcrTevcov, eav re KOfjLiarjTai Kai dv fxrj, (rrepyerd) 

(0? OVK€TL SiKTjS OVQ-qS TMV TOiOVTiOV TTC/Ot (rVVaXXd^€U)V, aud 

915 e 2 if. — As to usury cf. below 921 d. — As to dowries, at 774 cd 
Plato gives reasons for this law, and penalties for its infringement. 
This was apparently the law in Sparta "teste Aelian. V.H. vi. 6, 
Hermann, De vestig." Stallb. 

c 7. cTTtTr^Scv/jtara : used in the neutral sense of hahit, rather 
than practice. 

6.1. €7rava(f)€piov ktX. explains wSe. — Tr)v dp)(r]v . . . Kal rrjv 
/SovXyja-iv : we may translate the words as a hendiadys, " the 

526 



NOTES TO BOOK V 742 d 

fundamental intention." a/^X^ ^^ ^^®^ ^" ^^^ sense of " first 
principle" much as at Tim. 48 (b, c,) e 2 rj ^ ovv av^ts a/oX"*? 
Trepl Tov 7rai/To? ecrro) fxet^ovios rrj'S irpoadev SLyprj/nevr]. 

d 3. All the edd. which I have examined — except the Louvain 
ed. (1531), which has a comma after vofxoOerrjv — put a comma after 
(fiaUv ; Steph. and Ast put a comma after vofxoOeryjv as well. 
The latter comma seems to me right, the former wrong. This 
was Ficinus's view, for he translates " quam in legumlatore 
optimo esse debere multi affirmant " ; Schneider also translates as 
if there were no comma after (jiaUv. Becv, which is anyhow rather 
redundant (see above on 731 d 5), is less so if taken to depend 
directly on cfiaUv av. — Those who adopted O's jSovXevea-dat for 
(SovXca-daL would naturally put a comma after <^aUv. 

d 4. voiav ev = ivvov<^ wv, as far as construction goes, but the 
former has a suggestion of good sense, as well as benevolence ; cp. 
692 c 5 TO, . . . vo-qdkvra KaXd. 

d 5. vofModeTOL : if the " reported speech " had depended upon 
a primary tense, this would have been (y) dv (i/owv ev) vofModeTy ; 
after a secondary tense, any dependent clause's av c. subj. becomes, 
in the reported form, optative, e.g. Euthydem. 276 e aTreKpivaro 
OTL fxav6dvoL€v ol fxavOdvovres a ovk ctt terra ti'TO. Here <^at€V dv 
has the same effect as a secondary tense. So in English we say : 
" I should say that it was " but " I say that it is " ; i.e. / should 
say has the effect of a secondary tense. 

d 6. Burnet was the first to print the correct MS. reading 
Xpvcr€ia and dpyvpeca. Even Schanz prints \pvcna and dpyvpia 
without comment. 

d 7. 7rpocrd€iev 8' dv, "I dare say they will add." — It will 
be remembered that the doctrine here taught has been put forward 
before at 687 f, where it was explained (688 b 6) €vxy ^pria-dat 
(TffiaXepov etVat vouv jjlt] K€KTrj|A^»'Oj'. 

e 3. rd Se fiT] Sward ovt' dv /SovXolto fxaraias fBovXi]criL<5 ovt' 
dv €7nx€Lpot : it is true that this sentence would be clear and 
grammatical without fiaratas jSovXycreLs, but I find it much 
harder to imagine (as Schanz does) that anyone would complicate 
the construction by inserting these two words, than to explain 
them as they stand. Occupying, as they do, the same relation to 
TO, fXYj Sward as fSovXoir' dv in the previous sentence does to rd 
Sward — and standing side by side with kTrixeipol dv, which also 
governs rd p^rj Sward — the words av fSovXoiro /xarata? /SovXycrei'S 
are enabled to govern rd imt] Sward directly. So above at 705 c 9, 
in /i,t/x^o-€ts Trov7)pd<i pLtpLeLo-dai rovs TroAcjaiovs, and at Eur. I. A. 

527 



742 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

1181 cr eyo) Koi TralSes Se^o/xeda S^^lv rji/ ae Sc'^aaOai xp€a>v, verbs 
with ace. of the inner object are enabled to govern a direct object 
as well. At Symp. 222 a v/jllv eiTrov a jie vfSpLcrev the /xe is in a 
similar position. (Ast says /xar. fSovX. are " epexegetic " to ra ixrj 
Svvara, Stallb. that to, /jlt] Sward are " absolute posita " — " quod 
vero pertinet ad ea quae non possunt fieri " ; the objection to this is 
that kTTi\<eipoL wants a direct object.) — " He will send no vain 
wishes in the direction of the impossible, any more than he will 
try to attain to it." 

e 4 f . (TxeSov . . . yiyv^a-Bai : i.e. they could hardly be one 
without being the other as well. 

e 7. ovs y€ 8rj ttA. ol TroAAot KaTaXeyovat : Ritter (p. 148) 
reminds us that it follows from the definition of poverty given 
above at 736 e 2 f. that Plato would call rich the man who is 
abstemious and independent of external possessions. 

e 8. ev oAtyots Tcov dvOpcoTrwv : a variety of (Tcf>68pa^ or 
8ia(f>€p6vT(x)S. Stallb. well cps. the Lat. "homo in paucis doctus." 

e 9. a Kai KaKOs tls KeKTyr dv : I think this means " and 
that is just what a bad man would be likely to acquire." But all 
previous interpreters take it to mean " and that is what even a 
bad man might possess." If they are right, the argument halts. 
Plato has previously said — not that it is not necessary for great 
riches and great goodness to be united — but that it is impossible. 
The ordinary interpretation would be a good proof of the former, 
but it is superfluous after the latter. Moreover, as he has just 
said that a very rich man cannot be very good, why should he here 
state it merely as a possibility that the great fortune should be in 
the hands of a bad man ? 

743 a 1- The argument then proceeds to deduce from the 
previous statement (at e 5) that goodness and happiness must 
always go together, that the very rich cannot be happy either. — 
avTOLS is 01 TToWoL, who are assumed to hold that great riches are 
necessary to happiness. 

a 3 f . dya6ov 5e . . . dSvvarov : this is a simple restatement of 
what he said above at e 6 f. Its repetition is not necessary to the 
argument. Probably it was put in to make it clear that this is 
what the following arguments are destined to prove. — It is notice- 
able that Stobaeus {Flor. 93. 26), in quoting this passage, reverses 
the order in which the two forms of the statement occur ; dyadov 
81 ovra Sta^oyows . . . comes before ttXovctlovs o av (r(f)68pa . . . 
— Not only nearly all Plato MSS., but the MSS. of Stobaeus and 
Origen who quote this passage, read Siacfiopojs in a 3. Elsewhere. 

528 



NOTES TO BOOK V 743 a 

Plato always uses this word in the sense of differently. Ast, Herm., 
Ziirr., Stallb., and Schanz read 8ta<^€/odi/TO)s. I think Burnet is right 
in following the MSS. For variety's sake Plato used the word in 
an unusual sense, trusting to the following Sta^e/aovTws, in a 
similar position, to define it. 

a 5. 17 T€ €K SiKatov Kol olSlkov KT'7j(TL<s ', Stallb. says the re goes 
with the KaL He compares Crito 43 b 4 ev TocravTr) re dypvTrvt^ 
Kol Xvirrj, and Phaedo 86 c at t' kv rois (fiOoyyots kol [ai] eu rots 
Twi/ STj/JLLovpyiov cpyoi<s. May be ; but I am inclined in this 
instance to think that yj re . . . KTrjaLs was meant to go entirely 
with Ttt T€ dvaXio/jLara. (So Schneider.) 

a 6. TrAeov rj StTrAacrta : this implies the belief that more than 
half the money made in trade or other intercourse is made by 
asking too much for one's goods or services. — rd re . . . avaAtcrKe- 
o-daL. " the expenditures, which " (in the case of the bad man) 
" shrink from being made equally when it is right to spend and 
when it is disgraceful to do so." The negatives go in sense with 
kOkXovTa^ which is used with a curious "personification" of the 
expenditures. Stallb. cps. Rey. 370 b 10, where also the subj. of 
kdkXii is inanimate. In both cases kdkXeiv seems to be used as a 
semi-auxiliary — like our own " will." 

a 8. Ttoj/ . . . SaTravdcrOaLj " which are rightful and are ready 
to be incurred on rightful objects." — The KaAwv kol els KaXd 
balances iirire KaAw? /xT^re atVx/ows in sounds but not in sense, as it 
only deals with one sort of expenditure. — StTrAacrtw eAarrova : this 
time it is not ttXcoj' r\ StTrAao-iw, i.e. the necessary expenditure of 
both men is assumed to be about equal to what the good man spends 
on charity and the like; e.g. A spends £100 on necessary objects, 
and £100 on charity and the like, while B only spends £100 
altogether. In the subsequent calculation both expenditure and 
saving are spoken of as if they were in the relation of 2 to 1 and 
1 to 2 respectively. 

b 1 f . Twi/ (masc.) is gen. after irXovcrMTepos. With twi' eK we 
must supply something like TrpaTTovnov, as suggested by the 
following TT/oaTTcov ; tovtojv (neut.) is the getting twice as much and 
the spending twice as little. 

b 4. 6 Se ov KttKos oTttv y (^etSwAos : the miserliness of the bad 
man keeps him in a neutral state as far as regards expenditure on 
disgraceful objects ; though it does not make him good, it keeps him 
from being had in a particular direction. — The less well attested 
reading ovk dyaOos (for ov kukos) comes to the same thing, i.e. 
"the other (the bad man) is not good when he forbears to spend on 

VOL, I 529 2 M 



743 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

bad objects— only miserly" ; but ov KaKo? goes mucli better with 
the next line {dyaOos Se ktX..). — Early edd., e.g. Louv. and Steph., 
have TOT€ ; so Ast, who points out that, as at A 63, tot€ 8e is used 
without the usual totc /xev preceding it. So Stallb. and Burnet. 
Other recent edd. read rore, which w-ould mean "when he is 
miserly." The words tot€ Se ttotc mean " though on occasion " ; 
i.e. w'hen it is a question not of spending, but of making money. 
Then the bad man's actions are positively — even superlatively — 
bad. (A's TrayKaAos is clearly a mistake.) 

b 5. oTre/D etprjTai ra vvv is equivalent to a geometrical Q.E.D. — 
For " The Philosopher Leo " or " The Great Leo " mentioned in 
Burnet's note to this passage as here ceasing to correct the text 
see Gibbon ch. liii. (vol. vi. p. 104 Bury's ed.). 

b 7. orav KOL . . . 7revy]s, " j)rovided that he is at the same 
time of a niggardly nature, though in fact the superlatively bad 
man is very j)oor, because he is generally a jirofligate spender." 
— Granting, as everybody seems disposed to do, that TrayKaAos 
(b 4) in A is a writer's slip for ndyKaKos, the text appears quite 
sound, and needs none of the alterations great or small proposed 
by Madvig, Badham, and Schanz. Plato treats the situation 
thoroughly — turns it inside out. He then turns to consider the 
way in which men become very poor. Here, too, the very bad 
have the pre-eminence ; indeed it is only the vice of niggardliness 
w^hich keeps a few very bad men at the other end of the scale. 

c 3. Again " Q.E.D." 

C 5. Above at 718 a 6-b 5 we have been told that the details of 
our code will teach us what behaviour to our fellows rrjv ttoXlv 
r]/JiiV, (rvfi/3ovXev0evTb)v O^dv, jxaKapiav re kol evSatfjiOva aTroTekei. 
Again, at 693 b 4 w'e read ttoXlv eXevOepav re elvat Set Kat 'ifKfipova 
Kttfc eaurp <j)tXY]i/, Kat rov vo/xoderovvra irpos ravTa (^Xkirovra Set 
vop.oder€iv. At the same time, 17 twv vo/xwv viroOecris evravda 
e/^AcTrev does not, I <think, refer to any definite statement in an 
earlier part of the work, but is a completion of the statement begun 
just above at 742 d 2 ff. There he tells us what the statesmanlike 
lawgiver would not make his object in framing his laws. Hence I 
would translate : " The object of our laws (which I was explaining) 
is" The imperfect is what Goodwdn, M. and T. § 40, and Adam 
on Rep. 490 a, call the " philosophic imperfect " — "was " being equal 
to " is, as we saw." 

d 2. Xkyojx^v ^-q ; the asyndeton emphasizes the statement. — 
Sciv : in O ilvai is written before xpvcrov, but is marked as 
doubtful. This means that the writer — or corrector — knew of a 

530 



NOTES TO BOOK V 743 d 

text in which there was no eivai. Stobaeus also has eivai before 
Xpvcrov. Schanz's note — " ai cf. Theaet. 176 d" — reminds us that, 
as there in oTovs Set kv tjj ttoAci tou? <r(i)6rj(rofi€Vov<Sj so here in Selv 
ev rrj ttoAci we have a — probably conversational — use of Seiv in the 
sense of " to be proper," " to be of the right sort." We get 
the same use in the absolute Seov and in (e.g. Tr/acDiaiVepov) rov 
SeovTos. 

d 4. fi-qSi /3ocrKr;uaTa>i/ ala-\puiv : this expression is a puzzling 
one. Ficinus translates as if the right reading were alcrxpo)^ (for 
ato"x/5wv) — " nee ex pecoribus turpiter." So Stallb. " Videtur 
intelligi turpe lucrum ex re pecuaria," Wagner " (durch) 
schimpfliche Viehzucht." Schneider translates baldly " nee 
questum multum artibus exercendum sordidis et fenore aut 
turpihus pecoribus " ; Jowett has " or rearing the meaner kinds of 
live stock." Susemihl asks if (ioa-Kiqixara could possibly mean 
"slaves"? Ritter thinks that what is forbidden is (1) the 
rearing of beasts for sport (cp. 789 b f.), and especially (2) the 
fattening up of beasts to serve as delicacies for the table, and that 
the term al(T\pCJv is used because animals so fattened are generally 
castrated. Ritter rightly points out that he cannot mean to 
forbid all rearing of stock, as that is allowed at 849 c 1. I would 
suggest that in /Soa-KY^fxaTiDv Plato is merely carrying on and 
enlarging the metaphor contained in tokos, and that ala-xpCdv 
belongs to both nouns. I would translate : " And we will have 
no great money-making out of base trade, or vile money-breeding 
— or money-feeding either." The capitalist is represented as not 
only " breeding " from his money, but as rearing — " nursing " — 
his stock so bred. 

d 4 f . oo-a, and oTrdrra ("such only as") are "vi deminuendi 
posita" (Stallb., who cps. iioph. 217 e and Phaedo 83 b). So at Ar. 
Nub. 434 aAA' oar' 'ifiavTM (TTpexpoSiKrja-aij and at Aesch. Septem 
732 x66va vaUiv Sia-mjXas OTrocrav Kal cfiOufJiivoicrLV KaT€\€iv. 

d 6. Money, he goes on to say, is only needed to supply human 
wants, and the first of these is a proper training for soul and 
body. If \pr]fjLaTi(rix6<i bulks too large in the state, it will not 
only take up time and energy which is necessary for education, 
but it will make men forget the need for education. 

e 1. Ty]S a\\rj<s TraiSeias, " the corresponding (mental and 
moral) training." (The usual chiastic arrangement.) — ovk . . . 
a^La Aoyov, " will never be anything but poor things." 

e 5. opdois, like oaa and oTroVa above, is used in a limiting 
sense. 

531 



743 6 THE LAWS OF PLATO 

e 7. ovTit) : i.e. in accordance with the order of importance just 
given. 

e 8. vofxoOeLTai^ the reading of 0^, is doubtless a writer's slip 
for vofiodereiraLj which is the reading of Stobaeus. The perf. 
(as A), though. less natural after el TarrcTat, is more significant: 
" we have been right in the laws we have made ; " i.e. the fact 
that the right qualities are held in the highest honour is a proof 
that the legislation has been right. — ol avToBc TrpocrTaTTo/xevot 
vofxoL are " any laws which may hereafter be made in the colony," 
i.e. *' and the same test will be applicable to all future legislation." 

744 a 3. eTrLG-qjxatvea-OaL, " make it clear to himself." 

a 4. €t . . . r| : as eTrLa-rjixatvecrOai is equivalent to " ask him- 
self the question," this question can be treated as if it were an 
indirect one. If it were put directly, the two alternatives would 
be introduced by Trorepov . . . r/ ; " The lawgiver, I tell you, 
must often ask himself these two questions : first, ' What am I 
aiming at ? ' and secondly, ' Am I hitting the mark, or missing 
it ? ' In this way, and this only, he may possibly so discharge his 
task as to leave nothing for others to do after him." (Schanz 
marks a lacuna after ctkottou.) 

b 1. "^v KttAov : so StKatoTttTov ^v at 869 b 6. See Goodwin, 
M. and T. § 416. 

b 3. xpr^jxara : though we are not told so, we must assume 
that this portable property was not allowed to remain in the 
form of money — for the possession of gold and silver was forbidden 
(742 a) — but was exchanged for land which was added to the 
original KX7Jpo<s. — The KXrjpos was doubtless given by the state, 
so that a citizen, who arrived with only enough money to enable 
him to work it, could take his place among the rest. — The 
property qualifications for the four classes would probably be 
estimated not in (acres of) land, but in (bushels of) produce. 

b 4 flf. The difiiculties in this passage — and they are great — 
fortunately do not obscure its main point, which is contained in 
the words Set Srj . . . TLfJL-qfxaTa avicra yevecrOat. — " It would 
have been more convenient," we are told, " if each colonist had 
brought the same amount of property with him, but they have 
not." It being so, it is best (for certain reasons) for the state to 
recognize this inequality, and to make it the basis of a classifica- 
tion of the citizens into four divisions. — The difficulties concern 
the reasons for this proceeding. — Ritter (p. 149 ff.) has a helpful 
discussion of the passage. I follow him generally — except in 
what he says at the end about the readings — and more particularly 

532 



NOTES TO BOOK V 744 b 

in taking the €V€Ka clauses to furnish the grounds for the classifi- 
cation, not the purposes which it. was meant to serve. — Set 8y) . . . 
IcTOTi^Tos €V€Ka '. TToAAwi' . . . Tc is ou the model of aAAw? re . . . 
Ktti. He will not go into all his reasons, but only mentiens one 
— Le. the promotion of internal peace by allowing its due weight 
to wealth. We may translate : "especially as the state allows all 
a fair chance." 

b 5 fif. I'va ktA. : I prefer to regard this final clause as con- 
taining a rather gross zeugma, than as either deficient, or redun- 
dant (Steph. would remedy its supposed deficiencies by adding 
Kara before Tqv in b 6 and yiyvwvrat (or KaOtcTTiovTaL) before ra? 
TLfidiif and putting Se (for tc) after it. — Kitter accepts the Kara, 
and would reject o.pyaL . . . 8tavo/j.aL Ast — followed by Schanz 
— would reject from ap\al to TLfxT^v, and the latter also brackets 
IcroT-qTos €V€Ka.) — I imagine that, when the speaker begins tVa 
. . . TTJv . . . TLfirjv he personifies the occasions of election and 
tax-fixing, and has in mind some such expression as " may take 
account of," " may estimate," to govern Tifx-qv — " the price of each 
man's value," and, when all that does follow is aTroXafx^dvovTes — 
agreeing with a different subject — and Stac^e/awvrat, he has a 
vague notion that enough may be got thence to fill the gap. 
(Stallb., with a quite different explanation, adds re to to-oTT/Tos.) 
The only change I would make in Burnet's text is to reject the 
comma after Stavo/xaL. 

b 6. Siavofxai: in the case of distributions I imagine that the 
lower classes would receive more, while of elcrcfiopaL they would 
pay less. 

hi. fxr] . . . jxovov . . . dWd Kai : he does not say that birth 
and personal distinction of mind or body are not to weigh with 
those who appoint, but that the size of a man^s estate ought to he 
considered as well. 

C 1. All editors agree in reading fxrjSe with 0^ for A's fxyjre. 

c 2. xprjcFLv and ir^vLav are the MS. readings (though 0^ has 
Trevtas). If the simpler kttjo-lv (Ast) had stood for the former, it 
is hard to see how the more out-of-the-way xprrjcrtv came to be 
substituted for it. — With ra? TUfxds re we must suppose the subject 
to change and become " men," i.e. the men mentioned in ckcio-tois. 
— (0? l(rairaTa ry di/tcrw (rvfjLfiiTpio 8c : how real equality can be 
ensured by an award which though unequal is proportional to 
some recognized standard, is explained — as Ritter says — below at 
757 a b, where we are told, however, that the true standard can 
only be discerned by the divine intelligence. — I would translate 

533 



744 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(tVa . . . 8La(f)€po}VTai) : " that all occasions of election to offices 
or fixing of taxes or bounties (may estimate) each man's real worth 
not merely by his own or his ancestors' virtues, nor yet by their 
bodily strength or attractiveness, but also by his enjoyment of or 
his lack of wealth, and that men may be endowed with dignities 
and responsibilities on so fair a principle of proportional, though 
unequal, distribution, that no quarrels may disturb their peace." 

C 4. fxeyWet : an instrumental dative with Tt/xT^/xara 7roteto-^ai, 
which is equivalent to TLjxacrOai : " arrange by size of property in 
four classes." Ficinus translates fxeyedeu rrjs ov(TLa<s " magnitudine 
difFerentes bonorum." 

C 7. orav T€ . . . Kol orav : with Trpocrayopevofxevovs ; i.e. in 
any event the names (and property qualifications) of the classes 
will remain the same, whether the individual members change or 
not. — O's correction of its irkova-iiorepoL to Trkova-MTaroL — which 
is the reading of A — suggests that the latter was not a mere 
copyist's mistake on the part of the scribe of A (see below on 
d 4) but an old variant. 

d 2. ToSe . . . vofxov (Tyjip^a = vo/jlov cr^ijixaTos tovSc. 

d 4. The scribe of A seems to have been under some disturbing 
influence about this time. Not only does he make such a careless 
mistake as vo/xiV/AaTos here for voo-ry/xaTo? and 817 for Sei at e 1, 
but he omitted altogether, at the first writing, a long passage from 
745 a 2 {9eoi<s) to c 4 (Se). — o . . . KeKXy^a-dai, "which may more 
rightly be said to be disintegration than discord." Cp. Arist. Pol. 
iv. 1296 a 8 ottov yap ttoXv to Slo, p^kcrov, r^Kicrra (rrao-et? kol 
Staa-rao-ets yiyvovTai tmv TroXiTeiCiv. (Some translators — Fie, 
Serr., Wagn. — take 7) to be or.) 

d 6. With ttAovtov we are meant to supply some " strong " 
epithet equivalent to \aXeTrr]V. 

d 7. ravTa dp.(f>6Tepa : i.e. crracrtv kol StacrTa(rtv. Here we 
may call them class-division and class-discord. (Ritter says that, 
as these are only two names for the same thing, a/x^dre/oa should 
be rejected.) — The persistence of the reading dp,<f)6T€pa for a/x</)o- 
rkpoiv in d 6 — so A, 0, Stob. — gives weight to Wagner's suggestion 
that it is the second dp^cfiorepa in A and which ought to be 
altered to the gen. So Schanz, but Burnet prefers the authority 
of L which alters the first. — kKarkpov : i.e. Trevt'as KaX ttXovtov. 

e 1. dp)((i)v oijSets . . . Tiov re aAAwv ot'Sets ktA., " no magis- 
trate, and no good citizen." 

e 5. Kal p-kxpi- TirpairXacrtov : Aristotle, Pol. 1265 b 23, says 
rrjv Trdixav ovcriav e<^tr/o"i yLveordai /xe)(/ot Trei/raTrAacrt'a? • he 

534 



NOTES TO BOOK V 7446 

evidently took KTaadai to mean " acquire in addition to the 
KX.rjpo's" — 7rA,eiova, like tovtw^ and to, TrepLytyvofxeva, is neut. 
pi. ; hence SodevTiDV and rjixicrea. 

745 3' 4. (fiav€i . . . rjjXLiTiariv, " it will be open to anybody to 
get half by disclosing the fact." — 6 8e 6(f>X(i)v : if convicted, the 
culprit will lose an amount of his lawful property equal to that 
of the surplus v/hich he had held unlawfully. 

a 6. TO. S* 'qfjLLcrea twv Oeoiv : it would thus appear that the 
informer and the Gods would together get an amount equal to the 
illegal surplus. — Below at 754 ef the penalty for holding too 
much property is different : the culprit is to be excluded from the 
benefit of any future distribution (of land) and to bear publicly 
the reproach of ala-xpoKcpSeia. — The addition of Tracra facilitates 
the omission of the art. before ^co/)ts ; possibly it is best to take 
X(x)pt<s closely with yeypdffido}. Perhaps there would be two 
records : one giving the name (or number) and position of each 
KXrjpos, under the owner's name, and the other registering only 
each man's surplus holdings. These need not be near either half 
of thp original KX-7jpo<^, and so would go best in a separate register. 
Such a register would give the courts sure ground (cp. o-a^eis in 
b 1) to go on. 

a 7. (f>vXa^Lv ap^ovcTLv : the former word seems to be ex- 
planatory of the latter, so that the two words might be rendered 
" in charge of the magistrates." 

b 1. I would adopt H. Steph.'s oo-a for ocrat. The difficulty of 
the MS. reading is the only reason for thinking it genuine : "so 
as to simplify legal actions as far as property is concerned." 

b 2. ISpvcrSaL : lit. " to have (his city) placed " (middle) ; cp. 
Symp. 195 e tyjv oLK-qcnv iSpvrau (Ast, Lex. calls it pass.) 

b 3 f . Kol . . . iK\e^dp.€vov, " after he (the legislator) has chosen 
a spot possessing besides all the qualities advantageous to a city." 
Badham " requires " vTrdp^ovr' exovra. It looks as if it was to 
avoid this jingle that Plato chose the more long-winded oo-a . . . 
Ttov vTrapxovTiov. twi/ v7rap\6vTit)v is " the attendant circum- 
stances." (Ast makes it masc. — sc. tottiov — and translates " ex 
iis locis qui praesto sunt.") 

b 7. Upov : this has been variously interpreted: (1) as = 
Tyievos ; so Ficinus — he understands it to be the first of the twelve 
divisions — irpojrov being -rrpioTov p.kpos ; (2) as = templum — one for 
all three deities (Jowett) ; (3) as one temple apiece for the three 
deities (Wagner). I believe (1) is right, but that the sacred 
d/c/307roAis is independent of the twelve divisions. — dcj) ov : from 

535 



745 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

the Acropolis, as from a centre, are to radiate the dividing lines 
of the districts. (Ficinus takes d(f) ov to be " starting from 
which " ; another meaning which might be given to it is " apart 
from which.") — This central portion is particularly suitable for 
Hestia ; cp. Phaedrus 247 a with Thompson's note. 

C 1. Tcl 8ii)S€Ka : the art. here and in the next line is not merely 
"the just - mentioned " ; it suggests that the number is the 
rational one. At 771b Plato justifies the selection of the number 
twelve — a division, he says, eTro/xevrjv tol<5 ix-qaiv kol rfj tov iravro'S 
TrepcoSii). — It is clear that the dividing lines are to radiate from 
the central enclosure because each division is to contain part of 
the city proper. 

c 2. tara : the equality, he explains, is not to be reckoned by 
size, but by the productivity of the divisions. 

C 3. dyaOrjs yrys and x^t/o^i'os are genitives of material. 

C 5. Kal (TvyKkrjpojcraL . . . iKarepov, " and to join together 
as a lot two pieces of land partnered each with its near piece or 
with its far piece," i.e. each piece will have a fellow, the " far " one 
a "near" fellow, and the "near" one a "far" fellow. So I under- 
stand Peipers {Quaestiones Or. p. 96) to take the passage, and though 
the use of fxiTk^etv — " hold on to a partner " — is extraordinary, 
it seems better so to take it than to alter kKarepov to kKarepov 
(Ast) or €KaT€pii)Oev, either of which would be superfluous, or even 
to eicdcrTOTe (Schanz), " in the case of each Kkrjpos" which would 
be equally superfluous — and, besides, tov t€ . . . fxeTi^ovra 
would then seem a very complicated expression for to jxev eyyvs, 

TO 8e TTOppO). 

c 7. €Ls KX.rjpo<s : again I w^ould follow Peipers (p. 97) in 
rejecting cts Kkyjpos as an intruder from the margin. The only 
possible way of explaining it, if it be retained, seems to be 
to supply crvyKk-qpixyOqoreTai in thought from the previous 
crvyKXrjpwa-aL. Ast's ecrrw would not account for the datives. 
On the other hand, if only a comma be placed after cKare/sov, and 
eh K\rjpo<s be omitted, the next two clauses fall quite smoothly 
into their places. 

d 2. ixr]xavdo-6(u 8k . . . Siavo/x^Js, " likewise in arranging 
the separate halves we must regulate the proportion of poor soil 
to rich, of which we spoke just now, using dift'erences of size to 
produce equality " — i.e. the poverty and richness of the soil must 
vary inversely as the size. Not that each half KXrjpo^ must be 
equal to its fellow half, but that the near halves should be equal, 
and the far halves too. to ^avAoTr/Tos tc koI apcTTJs ^(^(Jopas is 

536 



NOTES TO BOOK V 745 d 

" the matter of the poverty etc. of the land," and, by a natural, 
though apparently unexampled expansion of this idiom, Plato 
makes vvvSrj Xeyo/xevov agree with the to. Ast and Schanz do not 
believe this expansion possible, and insert irepi — Ast before (j^avX. 
and Schanz after x<^/)a?. Stallb. makes the gen. by itself equal to 
the gen. with Trept, comparing Rep. 576 d 7. But this does not 
mean the same thing ; it is not " what he said above," but the 
" matter " itself, which is the object of ixrjxavaa-Oai. — The ex- 
pression is like TO t-^? Te^vrj^ at Gorg. 450 c. The article is 
probably left out here because, if put with one of the three nouns, 
it must have been put with all. At Eur. Phoen. 403, in a similar 
expression, we have Tot cfiiXiov for to, tujv (^iXuiv, and at Here. 
Fur. 633 TavOpcoTruiv for to, twj/ dvOpioTnov. — St^a T/JLVjfiaa-L is 
equivalent to a compound. (Ought we possibly to read 
8L\oTjj.T]fjiacrc T) 

d 5. The MS. vetfxaa-daL — Fie. ^^dividere" — would have to 
usurp the sense of the act. here, " we must divide the men too 
into twelve bodies " ; if not, how is crvvTa^d/jLevov to be explained ? 
Schan,z holds that there is a lacuna after fMcpr). I believe that 
Plato wrote fet/xat. — As at e 1 above the MSS. vary between 8rj 
and Set; this time A is right, and wrong. — r-qv : with this I 
think we are meant to supply SLavofxrjvy as suggested by Siavo/x^s 
and vei/xat just before. (Ast would supply kttjo-lv, or, in prefer- 
ence, change tt^i/ into rd.) — akXt^s, " superfluous," i.e. over and 
above the KXrjpos. 

d 6. €t9 L(ra TOL SioSeKu peprj^ " (arranging the distribution) so as 
to make the twelve tribes equal (in wealth)." (No need with 
Schanz to reject Tct.) — This division would spread the rich men 
equally throughout the twelve tribes. 

d 8. The twelve Gods are to have their KXrjpoL as well as the 
citizens. This assigning of each territorial division to a patron 
deity would foster tribal patriotism, and prevent separate coalitions 
amongst either the rich or the poor throughout the state. 

e 1. Xaxov : see L. & S. s.v. § V. 

e 4. vifxecrOaL eKacTTov : there is a change of subject here. 
" Each citizen is to possess two houses." 

e 5. All edd. now adopt Boeckh's correction of the MS. 
KaTOLKYjiTLv to KaToiKKTiv. Cp. above 683 a 1 and a 6. 

e 7. €/c TravTos rpoirov : Stallb. cps. Euthyd. 282 a. 

e 8. TO, vvv clprjiJiiva iravra ktX., "all the arrangements sug- 
gested above are not likely ever to find just the conditions which 
will ensure that they should all be carried out quite literally." 

537 



745 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

e 9. ovTiD ("quite") goes with Kara Xoyov — as in the 
phrase (xttAws ovtms at 633 c 9. 

746 a 1. avSpas T€ here, and en Se )(^u)pas . . . /xecroTTyras re 
Kttt . . . oLK^o-ei<s at a 6 introduce the two main divisions into which 
the above-mentioned "arrangements" fall — the accusatives being in 
each case in apposition to a-v/xTravra. (Stallb. takes /xecr. and oik. 
to be governed by €\ovt€s.) 

a 4 f . x/o^^ou : here regarded as an ornament. — The two clauses 
which express what the "men" will not submit to have — limited 
money, and limited families — are balanced by two clauses which 
express what the men will not submit to be deprived of — i.e. 
decorative gold, and other luxuries which the legislator will 
evidently forbid. — irpou-ra^uiv is rather strangely used for " add 
to the list of things forbidden." (Badham proposes to read 
€T€pa a, regarding it as the second out of three things which are not 
likely a-v/xTravra avpfS^jvat yevo/xei'a, i.e. (1) avSpas re ktA., (2) 
Kal 'irepa and (3) ert Se x^P^^ '^'^^' -^^^ things a 8^Aos 6 voixoOeTrjs 
7rpo(TTd^(Dv are not of the nature of thirigs tvhich may be expected not 
to happen. They are within the power of the legislator, to ordain 
or not as he sees fit. 

a 6. Here we have the usual chiasmus : it is the city which is 
to be in the middle^ in the ideally arranged state, and it is to have 
dwellings arranged " all over the country " round it. The plural 
fxecroTTjTas is chosen perhaps to balance the plural olKy^(TeL<s, and 
to avoid the two short syllables at the end of fxecrorrjTd re, and, 
though strange, it can be explained as "central positions for all 
states which have a city." (I think it is possible though that we 
ought to read pea-oTrfrd re. — Wagner would read ^ecratrara?, in 
agreement with olK/ja-ei'^ ; the superlative seems hardly natural.) 

a 7. oLov ovetpara Atywv, rj TrkdrriDv Kaddrrep €k K7jpov : Stallb. 
aptly cps. Rep. 471c, where Socrates is said to have forgotten to 
show cos Swary] axWq rj TroAireia yevecrOaij Kal riva Tpoirov ttotc 
^vvarri. — Burnet has rightly gone back to the arrangement of the 
older interpreters — e.g. Ficinus and Ast — in putting the comma 
after irdvrrj instead of before it. 

b 1 f . XPl 5' • • . TO. TotaSe, " he " (the legislator) " must go 
over his ground again in the following manner." — It looks as if 
this and the following sentence were two alternative ways of say- 
ing the same thing. Plato can hardly have meant both to stand 
as they are. (Schneider, Wagner, Stallb., and Schanz prefer the St 
irdvTa kapf3dv€iv of A to the €7ravaXap.fSdv€LV of L and O. Schneider 
translates : " sed opus est ut quisque haec secum reputet." In so 

538 



NOTES TO BOOK V 746 b 

doing he ignores the fact that to, rotaSe, especially coming, as it 
does, so soon after to. Toiaura, must mean ^^what follows." It is 
hard to say what Ficinus read ; his translation of XPV • • • "roSe 
is : "sed ea quoque narranda quae legislator ad versus diceret.") 

b 2. TrdXiv <f>pd^€i repeats the notion of kTravaXafxfidviiv. What 
follows is, in effect, a "repetition" of what we read at p. 739 
about the degrees by which a state may fall off from perfection. 
What is here the model is (as Ritter says, p. 154), what was spoken 
of above as the Sevrepa ttoAis. 

b 4 f . The subject of 8t€^ep;(eTafc is to vvv Aeyo/xei/ov — see above 
on 727 b2 ; Burnet therefore does well to reject the comma after 
keyofxevov. (Winckelmann would read tov for to ; but no " man " 
has 80 far been mentioned.) 

b 5. €v eKOLCTTOLs Twv /xtAAovTwv cVccT^at I i.e. " whenever there 
is contemplated any future course or performance." 

b 6. O has here the correct roBe as against the Toi^Se of A, L 
and 0- ; cp. below 967 d 1 where also preserves the right reading. 

b 8. <S : masc. (Ast would like to read ttt] for Tt in c 1, and take w 
as neut.), 

c 2. Twi/ AoiTTwv : i.e. " among possibilities " — what are left over 
after impossibilities have been "ruled out." 

C 3. (Tvyy€V€GrTaTov . . . TrpaTTeiv, " is most akin to what it 
is good to do" — i.e. to the perfect institutions of the "pattern." 

C 4. For SLajMrj^avdcrdaL cf. Rep. 518 d. 

C 5. TcAos . . . /3ovXrj(T€L : i.e. " to make his TrapdSetyfxa as 
perfect as his heart could wish." Not only must the colonists' 
representative (i.e. Cleinias) do his utmost to carry all that is 
practicable in the pattern into effect, but, before deciding what is 
practicable or not, he must let the lawgiver (i.e. the Athenian) 
finish his description of the " best possible. ' 

C 7. TtUv elprjfxevojv (which depends on oTt), and Try? vo/xo^ecrias 
(which depends on tl) both describe the lawgiver's proposals as 
conveyed in the TrapaSeiy/xa, and crvfxcfiepiL and Tr/adaavTe? (ecTTt) 
are used absolutely. (Ficinus, and apparently Wagner, translate 
Trjs vopodecrLas as if it were a dative governed by irpoa-avTes : 
" quidve ferendis legibus adversetur " — " und was der Gesetzgebung 
Feindseliges angefiihrt worden.") 

C 8. oixokoyovfievov avTO avTw : this refers to arvpffiepeL. An 
instance of ^inconsistency would be the placing the city in. the 
middle of the country, when there was a manifestly better site for 
it elsewhere. " Self-consistency " is also the subject of the follow- 
ing passage about numerical arrangements. 

539 



746 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 3-e 3. I think the key to the explanation of this very difficult 
passage is to be found in Stallbaum's suggestion that tovt avro 
in d 3 is to o/zoAoyov/xefOj/ avTo aurw — or rather " the need for 
self-consistency " ; but he did not follow out this idea far enough. He 
stopped at the word 7r€i'TaKta-;>(tAia>v, whereas the reference to this 
self-consistency is not made clear until we get to the words e/x/xer/aa, 
and dXXy]XoL<i crv/x^wva, at e 2. The main part of the sentence I 
take to be this ; TrpodvfMrjTcov ISeiv rtva rpoirov Travra ravra 
€fx/x€Tpa Kal aAAT^Aots (TVfi(ji(s)va Sel tov vofiov raTTetv. iravra 
ravTa " resumes " ra SioSeKa fieprj kol to, tovtois crvv€7r6p.€va 
(including the /xer/aa etc.) — odev . . . crra^/xa being, as Burnet 
marks it, a parenthesis. — I believe that for the MS. ttjv 86^av 
Trj^ we ought to read tt)? So^dcrrjs — fxerd would then mean " in 
conjunction with" instead of " in sequence to." — Srjkov I take to 
agree with rpnirov. — avrov, if genuine, must be the adverb (as in 
€v9d8' avTov, Kar' olkovs avTov), but I prefer to accept Stall- 
baum's suggestion that it is a mistake for av. We may translate : 
" That very self-consistency we must now do our best to consider 
in conjunction with the proposed division of the state into twelve 
parts, inquiring in what conspicuous way the twelve parts, which 
in their turn admit of being divided in very many ways, — 
these and their immediate subdivisions, and those which spring 
from them, until we get down to the 5040 individual citizens — 
and such divisions will give you your cfypaTpiaL, your Brj/xoi, and 
your Kw/xai, and besides these, your military divisions, whether 
for battle or the march, yes, and your money-values and your 
measures, whether of solids, liquids, or weights — how all these, I 
say, are so to be fixed by law as to harmonize with and to fit in 
with each other." 

Hermann proposes a very ingenious emendation of SrjXov St^, 
i.e. SieAetr Set ; and upon this Wagner founds a still more ingenious 
explanation, which some may prefer to that given above. It is 
that the original text ran : to TiVa t/oottoi/ StcActi/ Set to, SwScKa 
P'^py]. SyjXov 8r] Kara p-^pr] twv 6vtos ktA., and that, owing to 
the similarity of the two clauses, StcAeiv . . . p-€pr] was accidentally 
omitted. (He does not explain how Kard then became toL SioBeKa.) 
He then takes TrAewrTas as a true superlative : " clearly you will 
split them up into the parts which have the greatest number of 
divisions " — he accepts Ast's avrCiv for avTOv. — This explanation 
is more natural (than that given above) so far, but it does not 
accommodate itself so well to what follows. — As to TrAetWas 
8iavo/xtt5 in d 5, 420 {^ of 5040) is divisible by 1, 2, 3, 4, 

540 



NOTES TO BOOK V 746 d 

5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 14, 15, 20, and 21, to say nothing of larger 
numbers. 

d 7. <f>parp(,a<i koX Syj/xovs koI Kw/xas : the first, as in Athens, 
would be a personal division, founded on blood-relationship ; the 
last two are local ones. Herm. De vest.j in commenting on the 
adoption of these familiar terms, reminds us that Aristotle, Poet. 
1448 a 35, says that kw/jltj is the Spartan word for what the 
Athenians called Sry/xo?. On this passage of Ar. Bywater quotes 
Isocr. 149 a SieAo/xevot tt^v fxkv ttoXlv Kara Ktu/xa?, rrju Se \iiipav 
Kara S-q/xovs. This does not seem to have been Plato's idea, for 
below at 848 c the SioSeKa Kio/jLaL are evidently in the country. 

e 1. A- made a bad suggestion in changing aywyas to dywvas. 
Cp. 819 c 4 €i<s T€ Ttts rtov crrpaTOTreSwv ra^et? Kal aywyas. The 
arrangement of an army on the march differs from the battle order. 

e 3. 0^ makes a natural but quite unnecessary suggestion that 
for vofxov we ought to read vofxoderyjv. 

e 4. ScLcravTa follows the construction noticed above on 643 a 6, 
and 688 e 5, of the ace. of the agent after a verbal adj. in -reov. — 
Wp So^acrav av yiyv^crOai crfiiKpokoy tav, " what might appear 
to be a peddling minuteness." 

e 6. The standardizing of the parts of machinery, due largely 
to Sir Joseph Whitworth, has conferred incalculable benefits on 
modern mechanical engineering. ("We want a world -lawgiver 
to-day, to ordain a metric system on a duodecimal basis.) — Kal Kotvw 
Aoyo) vopLLcravTa : advantage is taken of the fact that SeicravTa 
has preceded, and the construction is continued ; but the con- 
nexion with the main verb (<^o/?r/T€a cctti) is not the same. In 
translating we must begin afresh, as Ficinus does — " Et com- 
muni ratione censeat, etc." — Schanz would slightly mitigate the 
dvaKoXovdov by omitting Travra in e 5. 

747 ^ 2. oaa €v eavTOLs : i.e. pure arithmetic ; oaa cv p.rjKe(rt 
Kal kv /SdOio-L : plane and solid geometry. Then follow the 
numerical Eispects of the sciences of harmony and kinetics. 

a 5. Trpos ravra iravra (^Xkxj/avra : i.e. in view of this general 
applicability (Trpos iravTa \pr](Tip.ov<i a 1) the lawgiver must insist 
on the importance of this standardizing (crvvTa^eios)- The reason 
is that men's minds will be accustomed to think of each number 
as having certain relations to other numbers. 

b 1 flf. "For home life, for public life, for all kinds of arts and 
crafts, the most efiicacious branch of education is mathematics. 
But the great point is that it wakes up the sleepy and stupid 
nature, and makes it quick, and mindful, and shrewd ; the 

541 



747 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

improvement upon its original self is miraculous." For the use- 
fulness and intellectual effect of mathematics cf. below 819 c 6 
Kai Trai'Tws Xpr^a-Lfxiiirkpovi avrovs aurois Kat iyprjyopoTas fxaWov 
Tovs dvdpwTrovs aTTipyd^erai. Cp. also Rep. b'^^o,^ 525 c, and 
526 a 8. 

b 5. The use of irapd is much the eame as above at 693 b 1 tl 
irapd Tavra eSeu TrpaTTetv aAAo, and grows out of the meaning 
^7^ comparison with which is often found in irap dXXrjXa, e.g. 
Rep. 435 a; cp. above 729 e 4. (Wagner translates: "indem er, 
vermogen dieser gottlichen Kunst, gegen seine Natur Fortschritte 
macht.") 

b 6. dX\oi<i is almost our " further." 

b 7. Tis : our " you." 

b 8. avTOi is, of course, mathematical proficiency. 

C 2. TTjv Ka\ovfJi€V7jv dv rts Tvavovpytav avrl o-o<^tas dinpyaa-d- 
fxevo^ XddoL, " you would find, to your surprise, that you had made 
a regular rogue of him, instead of a philosopher." rrjv KaXovixkvrjv 
= " regular," " professional." 

C 5. aAAwv, as at b 6, denotes the rest of the habits and 
influences (besides mathematics) which mould the dispositions of 
these unpopular Semites. Cp. Rep. 436 a to cfaXoxpyP'OiTov o 
Tvepl Tovs T€ <i>otVtKas eivai Kal tovs Kara KtyvirTOV (^ant] Tts dv 
ovy^ yJKLorTa. 

C 6. KTrj/ndrMV dveXevOepias is put for cfaXoxprj/xaTias — " owing 
to the debasing effect of the rest of their j^nrsuits, and of their 
wealth." (The Egyptians got no further in their "geometry' 
after they had learnt enough to make practical land-surveyors. 
It was the " free " spirit of the Greek which built mathematical 
science on this foundation.) 

c 7. Without av this sentence would mean " whether it was a 
bad lawgiver who did it " ; the dv makes it " whether it might 
have been a bad lawgiver who did it . . ." (Steph. would change 
the dv to a^, Ast would read i^epydcratro for €^rjpyd(TaTo, Stallb. 
confines the force of dv to y€v6fx€vo<s, Schanz changes it to Byp) 

d 1. €tT€ Kttt (j)V(TLs dXXrj TLs ToiavTrj, " or even some natural 
influence of such a tendency apart from these." One such possible 
influence, as he proceeds to say, is that of locality. 

d3. The ovk, which Ast would reject, is established by all 
MSS., and by those of Galen and Stobaeus. Stallb. rightly 
defends it as the same negative which is put in after aTrapvetcrOai, 
and cites similar negatives at Prot 350 d and Philebus 26 d, where 
they are inserted after ws ovk 6pOo}<s wfioXoyrjo-ay and ovk 

542 



NOTES TO BOOK V 747 d 

eSva-KoXaLVOfiev respectively. Here fxr^Bc . , . rj/ia^ Xavdaveno = 
" let us not be so forgetful as to imagine tliat . . ." (Schanz 
follows Ast in deleting ovk ; other proposals are to read eot/cacrii/ 
(Diibner) or TT€<j>vKaiTiv (Haupt) for ovk ilcrlv.) 

d 6. All editors adopt Kulmken's St' etA.>^o-€ts for the MS. 
StetAT^o-ets, though such a word as the latter would be quite 
natural here with iravToias understood. — evato-tot : there is no need 
to alter this word, nor is Stallb. right in assigning a sinister 
meaning to it. The Kai in all three cases is or. Different 
neighbourhoods, Plato says, produce dfxeivovs koi ^^etpovs — some 
good men, some bad ; and tlie lawgiver must recognize this. He 
then explains how the effect is produced : differences in the pre- 
vailing winds, and in the amount of sunshine are either prejudicial 
or the reverse (so Wagner), just as the drinking-water and the crops 
impart benefits or evils (afxelvw Kal xeipo)) to souls as well at bodies. 

d 7. Stobaeus's 8l avrr^v — so Ast conjectured — for which Galen 
has simply 8ta (so Schanz), is much more natural than the MS. 
Stot TavTrjv. — dva8L8ov(rav is transitive. (Fie. makes it intrans.) 

e 1. For the 8i after ov ixovov cf. above, 667 a 1. 

e 3. For tottol xwpa? cp. 760 c 7. 

e 4. deia kiTLTrvoia : cf. below, 811 c 9, and Rep. 499 c 1. — The 
notion in 8aipi6vu)v Ar^^ets is the same that we met at 745 d 8, 
where we read of the KXrjpot of the Gods. — The special salubrity 
of certain districts is so marked, as only to be explained, he says, 
by some supernatural agency. Cp. Eur. Med. 824 ff. — For the 
Tovs of O and L, A has an inexplicable toT? ; the scribe's eye 
must have strayed to a neighbouring oh. 

e 5. oh — for which Ast would read ovs — goes with rtOivai 
TOV5 vojxovs. He will make his laws to fit these special local con- 
ditions. 

e 8. A strongly marked explanatory asyndeton (tt/owtoi/ TpeTrreov). 



BOOK VI 

751 3- 4. 8vo €L8r} : we were told above at 735 a 5 that two main 
divisions of statecraft are (1) the appointment of the executive, 
and (2) the giving of laws. Here the first of these two divisions 
is subdivided into (a) the selection of those who are fittest to be 
magistrates, and (b) the apportioning, among the various offices, 
of the laws which have to be administered. — A and 0^ have 

543 



751 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

ytyvo/xevor. Like the rovs in all MSS. at d 1, the mistake was 
due to a careless assimilation to a neighbouring word. L has 
yLyvo/xeva. 

b 5-C 2. The main idea of this difficult paragraph is : " the 
sharper the instrument, the more dangerous it is in inefficient 
hands." The main difficulty lies in the infinitive clause tov . . . 
vofMOLS, which depends on ovSev TrAeov av (rvjxISaLvoL. The con- 
text shows, I think, conclusively that Plato's general meaning is : 
" no advantage can spring from a well-equipped city's well-made 
laws, if it appoints incapable magistrates to administer them." 
The construction is hard to grasp, but I do not think it is 
improved if with Steph. we change tov to ck tov, or with 
Schramm (who is followed by Hermann, Wagner, and Schanz), 
we change tov into tw. We may say, I think, that the gen. tov 
eTTLa-Trja-ai is " prospectively " or " proleptically " attracted by 
T€$€VT(Dv. Kiddell {Dig. § 27) calls it "a genitive placed at the 
beginning of a construction, for the sake of premising mention of it, 
without any grammatical justification of the gen." — A minor diffi- 
culty arises in connexion with the gen. abs. clause /xeydXov . . . 
epyov. Wagner translates " inasmuch as " {da\ — Jowett, and 
probably the Latin translators, by ^^ although . . . lawgiving is a hard 
task," or " an important matter." I think the former is prefer- 
able to the latter, but that, though the syntax would allow 
either, and fxeya 'ipyov is often thus used, the hint of the ev 
7rap€(TK€va(Tfi€vrjv and the emphatic position of jxeydXov entitle 
us to translate : " where the product of lawgiving is an elaborate 
one " — the tov belonging to epyov being left out for rhythm's 
sake. For /xeya epyov in the sense of " grand achievement " cp. 
Symp. 178 d. I would translate the whole clause: " that, where 
your code of laws is an elaborate one, what follows if a well- 
equipped state sets inefficient officers to administer its well-made 
laws is this : not only does it reap no benefit from their excellence, 
and become a laughing-stock to the world, but you may be pretty 
sure (o-xeSov) that states in such a condition would find such laws 
particularly dangerous and injurious." (Heindorfs idea, which 
Ast adopts, that apxas eTrirr^Setovs e'x^''^ ^^^ fallen out before 
<eK> TOV is sufficiently refuted l)y Hermann in his critical note. 
The whole passage is unintelligible if we do not grasp the fact 
that vofxoOeo-ia and ap^wv KaTacrrao-is are two quite distinct things. 
— F.H.D. suggests that €v TedevTiov is a " gloss.") 

c 4. I think tovto refers back, and means " the danger of having 
incapable magistrates appointed." 

544 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 751 c 

C 6. /3d(Tavov . . . etvat SeScoKOTas : further references to the 
(Athenian) SoKifiaa-ia occur at 754 d 1 and 755 d 6. 

c 8. The correction of A's avTov<i to av tov<s was made in some 
MSS., and in all the printed editions. — The periphrastic elvai 
SeScoKoras is peculiar. 

c 9. Ast suggested that T€ is a mistake for Set. Schanz held 
that T€0pd<f>0aL and re ought both to be rejected ; but, though 
there is some tautology in TeSpdffiBaL TrcTratSev/aevovs, it is awkward 
to suppose the clvai from c 8 to be supplied in thought with 
TreTraiSev/xevovs. Hermann and Burnet think it better, with 
Stallbaum, to bracket only re. It is hard to believe that anyone 
deliberately inserted the re : it must be due to careless writing ; 
either the scribe's eye was caught by the re in the next line, or he 
unconsciously repeated the first syllable of TerpdcfyOaL, which came 
after another -dat. (Ficinus's " esse educates " gives some support 
to Schanz's view.) — iv rjdea-L vo/x.(ov : cp. 625 a 5 €7r€L8r) Se cv 
TOLOVTOLS y]6€(TL Tcdpaijide vo/xiKOLS (TV Tc Kttt oSc. Good laws 
breed good characters and habits of mind in those who live under 
them. 

d 1. For the MS. tov<s see above on a 4. — Kpcveiv Kal aTro- 
Kpiveiv : the usual chiasmus. The latter verb is used in the same 
sense at 961 b 6. 

d 3. ravra Se is adverbial, and seems here to have the meaning 
" but in this case " ; cp. 873 a 3. 

d 7 ff. aA.Aa yap . . . cfyatvoLTo : in other words " what we began 
in a speculative, imaginative vein, has turned into reality^ and we 
have now gone too far to retreat ; your state we must found, under 
whatever disadvantages. Even the imagination too has claims. 
I don't like to leave my fancy picture unfinished," — The omission 
of the cf)aa-lv in the MSS. was probably due to its similarity to the 
last two syllables of the preceding word ; it was recovered from a 
scholiast's quotation of this passage in his commentary on Crat. 
421 d. 

el. fj.€v S-q : "/x€v balances Se (after eycu), and should not be 
taken with SrJ in the ordinary sense of the collocation /xev S-q." 
Adam on fxkv Br) in a similar passage at Rep. 556 b. 

752 a 1. Kara rr^v irapovaav r^fxtv to. vvv fMvdoXoytav : cp. 
above on 712 a 4, b 2, 736 b 6. Most translators take fxv9o\oyia 
to mean conversation (Ficinus, Schneider, Wagner, and L. & S. 
S.V.), but it is clear that the Ath. regards his function to be that of 
providing the ideal to which the actual is to conform as far as may 
be. His proposal when the conversation began, and as it developed, 
VOL. I 545 2 N 



752 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

was to draw a picture of a perfect polity. At first it was all 
" make-believe " and the make-believe is not all to be given up, 
even now. 

a 3. 7rAavw/x€vo? . . . ^aiVotro, "if it went about the world 
without a head, it would look hideous." For the metaphor cp. 
Gorg. 505 d, Phaedr. 264 c, Phil. 66 d, Tim. 69 b. The scribe of 
A did not understand this passage ; he put a stop after TrAavw/xevos 
and left out the yap which we owe to L and O. They also 
preserve the reading KaTaAtVotjitt, which A^ altered to KaraAeiTrot/xt. 
After the av with TrAavw/xeros and the av in the preceding line it 
is natural that the av with (^alvoiro should be omitted. Ast (who 
conjectures av aTravr^) adds it, and so Cod. Voss. Heindorfs 
airavrL for aTrdvTrj is not lightly to be rejected, but TrAavw/xevos 
seems to want an amplification more than (f>aivoLTo. Herm. would 
reject aivavTrj. 

a 6. ov ^ovov ye aAAa : for the ellipse Stallb. cps. Phil. 23 b, 
Phaedo 107 b. 

a 8. The repetition of this reservation (cp. above 739 e 5 and 
632 e 7), coupled with a reference to the author's age, is a pathetic 
indication of his fears that he might not live to complete his task 
satisfactorily. 

b 2 ff. cTTo/xevoi ktA., " with his help we will not forget." 
" What ? " " What a bold stroke our present attempt at state- 
founding will prove." 

b 7. Trept Ti ^XeTTCov . . . avvb eip-qKas ; " on what subject are 
you thinking in saying so ? " and the m in the answer depends on 
a supplied ^Acttwv : " (I am thinking) how, etc." Kal ttoi /xaAicrTa 
(^AcTTcov) is "and why do you say so ?" Stephanus's tt/oos for Trept 
amounts to saying the same thing twice, for tt/oo? tl is here just the 
same as ttoi ; Badham's transposition of Kal ttol to the place before 
fSXeiroyv (which Schanz adopts) would make it less clear that 
pXeTTOiv has to be supplied in thought with the following ws. The 
two questions are answered chiastically : "I say we are venture- 
some because our future citizens will find our laws new and strange, 
and what I am afraid of is that they will reject them." 

b 10. oTTws Se^ovrat TTore, "in the hope that they will manage 
to accept." 

c 1 ff. As explained above (751c 8 ff.) no elector can choose 
magistrates properly who is not imbued with the spirit of the laws 
they will have to administer. Manifestly this will not be the case 
with the new colonists. There must be an interregnum to allow a 
generation to grow up who have acquired familiarity with the new 

546 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 752 C 

laws. Thus leavened — thus TratSay (ay rjOeLcra, as Plato says — the 
community may be trusted to elect its magistrates. — For the MS. 
irpoa-Si^aa-OaL the Louvain edition (of 1531) was the first to sub- 
stitute the future. Schneider, Stallb. and the Ziir. edd. retain the 
MS. reading, Stallb. defending it by a comparison of Phaedo 67 b 9, 
where KT-qcraa-dai follows cAttis (ecTTt). Madvig would read y* av 
for ye. 

C 2. €t Se fxetvaifxev ttws, " but if we could manage to survive." — 
Madvig's emendation of fxeivaifxev to /xeiVeiav, which Schanz adopts 
(so too F.H.D.), would simplify the construction, but is not necessary. 
C 3. iratSes is predicative, "from childhood" (Jowett). — The 
(Tvv- in (TvvTpa(f)€VT€s and orvv-qdecs yevojxevot couples the two 
expressions so closely that the t/<avcos is felt to qualify them both. 
C 4. Ty TToAet Trda-r} : it is difficult to decide whether this (as a 
possessive dative) goes closely with ap^aip^crnZv^ or with /cotvwvr^- 
cFiiav, i.e. whether it means "in the election of the whole list 
of state functionaries," or "share with the whole state." I incline 
to the former view. 

C 6. etTrep tlvI t/oottw kol jmrj^^avfj yiyvoiTO 6p6u)<i : this (like 
the TTws in c 2) suggests that the temporary arrangement for the 
administration would have to be very carefully devised. 

c 7. By rov TOT€ TrapovTa xpovov is meant the period of the 
interregnum — the too-ovtov xpo^^ov of c 2. 

C 8. For the use of 7rai8aywyry(9€tcrav cp. above 641 b 1 and 3 
o'v/JLTToa-Lov 8e opOoiS TraiSaywyrjOevTOS, and TraiSos Ivos rj kol 
Xopov TratSayoyyrjOevTos Kara rpoirov evo9. It answers to our 
phrase " to go in leading-strings." 

d 4. fxr] fxovov d<f)0(ri(i>(TacrO at irepX t>}s yjiapas : some emphasis 
should be laid on X(iipas — which all translators but Wagner 
ignore ; " ought not to restrict themselves to bare ceremonial 
relations with the land (which your colony is occupying) " — the soil 
i.e. as contrasted with the human element in the settlement. 

d 5 and 7. L has r)v vvv KarotKc^ere, A and 0^ r)v vvv 
KaTOLKL^€Tai, which A^ corrected by changing rjv to r), and 0^ by 
changing -rat to -re. Those who follow A^ (Stallb., Schneider, 
Ziirr., Hermann, Wagner, and Schanz) hold that the TrpiZrov 
j/'evSos was the careless addition of v to rj, due to the following 
vvv ; those who follow 0- (Ficinus, the early edd, up to Ast, and 
Burnet) hold it to have been a case of the common mistake of ai 
for €. (Stallb. says one of the Flor. MSS. has r) . . . KaroiKL^cTe.) 
The testimony of L seems to me to settle that matter in O^'s and 
the Vulgate's favour. — But this reading does not go well with 

547 



752 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Hermann's lo-rwo-ti/ for the MS. cttwctlv in d 7. The subject to 
KaTotKt^ere is not "you and Megillus," for there is no reason to 
regard them apart from the trio, but "you Cretans," or "you 
Cnossians," and, as Cleinias is a Cnossian (cp. 702 c 4), you must 
be supplied as the subject of eTrLfxeXrjdrjvac. But the subject of 
IcTTuicrLv must be they, i.e. the Cnossians. A still more decisive 
reason against tcrrcuo-tv is that the Ath. does not explain until the 
following paragraph who is to appoint the magistrates. It is only 
then that we find that the appointment is to be made by the 
Cnossians alone. Cp. 754 c. 

d 6. Ttts 7rp(0Ta§ apx^-'^ '• this ace, which furnishes the main 
support of Herm.'s conjecture lo-Twcrtv, is intelligible, I think, 
with (rT(j)(TLV. The construction whereby what should be the 
subj. of a dependent sentence is put in the ace. is a sterotyped 
one, something resembling the ace. c. inf. Cp. Aristoph. Nub. 1148 
Kttt fxoL Tov vlbv €1 fJLejxddrjKe tov Xoyov €K€lvov €t'<^', and 1115 
Tovs KpiTOLS a K€p8avov(TLV . . . f^ovXofxecrO i^/xeis (^paa-at, where 
Blaydes unnecessarily conjectures Tol<i KpiraU. — Along with this 
question we may consider the reading in e 1 where A has ai//xtv, 
and L and av r]fxiv — and so A^ — and the vulgate is 8' av 17/xtv. 
av has no place here, and Steph. (followed by Ast and Wagner) 
changed it to av, while Herm. (followed by Schanz and Burnet) 
discards it, supposing it to have arisen from a mistaken reading 
of S'. I would suggest that av /xlv is almost as likely to be a 
mistake for 8' v/jllv as for 8' rjfMiv, and that the former would suit 
the context better. 

d7. ras aAAa? must be supposed to be under the government 
of an alpeicrOai. 

el. Ktti, "merely." — vo/xo^vAaKa? : for the functions of the 
Athenian officers of this title cp. Grote, Hist, of Greece, vol. v. (ch. 
xlvi.) p. 226 f. One of their chief duties seems to have been to 
keep the ordinary magistrates " up to the mark." Ritter com- 
pares Epist. viii. 356 d where it is proposed to give to thirty-five 
vofxo(f)vkaK€s the decision of war or peace, and of sentences of 
death and exile. Above at 671 d, as R. says, it is not an official 
title, but a general description of men who enforce particular laws. 
(The following passage from p. 161 of Lord Acton's Lectures on the 
French Revolution describes a similar constitutional device to that 
of Plato's voixo(j>vXaK€<s : " He " (the Abb4 Sieyes) " mitigated 
democracy by another remarkable device. The Americans have 
made the guardians of the law into watchers on the lawgiver, 
giving to the judiciary power to preserve the Constitution against 

548 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 752 6 

the legislature. Siey^s invented a special body of men for the 
purpose, calling them the Constitutional Jury, and including not 
judges, for he suspected those who had administered the ancient 
law of France, but the elite of veteran politicians.") Wagner well 
reminds us, in this connexion, of the use of the term (f)v\aK€s in 
the Republic — first introduced there at 374 e. The (jivXaKes 
TravTiXeU of 414 b, and the reAeot cfivXaKcs of 428 d correspond 
to the vo/xoifivXaK€s of the Laws. 

e 5. Tiui' TToWwv TToXciov I a remirflsceuce of cKaro/xTroAts, the 
Homeric epithet of Kp-qTrj. 

e 8. Ficinus confirms Steph.'s eTroLKrja-ovTtav for the MS. 
€7roLK7](TdvTit)Vf for he translates tu)v dcfuKo/xeviiyv by " qui 
convenere," and twi/ ctt. by '* qui habitabunt." I think we should 
follow him. 

753 ^ ^- Schanz may be right in thinking rrj a mistake for 
TivLj especially as in A the t of ttjc is in an erasure ; still, rfj /xer. 
8vv. might well mean " by means of the power which they are 
entitled to exercise." 

a 6. €KOLV(ovr)(rdTrjv : for the termination see above on 705 d 5. 

a 7. fteya (^povovcriv : in saying that the enterprise was 
"beneath the dignity" of Athens and Sparta, the Athenian may 
well have meant to hint that the interference of two such great 
powers would be dangerous to the independence of the new state, 
to say nothing of the possible want of harmony between them. 

a 9 f . Kttt Tot? . . . Acydyu-eva, " and this remark applies 
equally to the other foundei-s, as do the proposals just made about 
yourself," i.e. the nine other Cnossians, mentioned above at 702 
c 5, are also to be induced to become citizens of the new state. 
It is a question whether we ought not to put a comma after e^et. 
Serranus, Schneider and Stallb. are right in taking otKio-rais to 
mean conditorihus. Ficinus and other translators take it to mean 
simple "colonists." The mistake of Xkyojxiv for Xeyofxeva seems 
to have originated with Aid. No MS. has it, and Ficinus 
translates the true reading. 

b 1. Both A and seem to have copied from a text which had 
fxkv vvv instead of /xev ovv, but both corrected the error early. 

b 2. elprjo-dii) (cp. 814 d 8) is equivalent to our "so much 
for . . ." The question ho20 the " interregnum " vo/xo^vAaKcs are 
to be elected is re-opened below at d 7. But he considers it 
important to give details of the normal election proceedings first. 

b 6. €V rat? o-(/)€T€/3ats avTiov rrjs i^AtKta? 8vvdfX€(riVj " while 
their ages permitted," i.e. the electors are to be all who are serving 

549 



753b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(oTrAa TLOiovTai\ and all who have served (TroAe/xou kckoivwi/t^kcoo-iv), 
as long as their age allowed it. Clearly it would not be intended 
to deprive the veterans of a vote after their retirement. 

b 7. Inasmuch as kolvo)vovvto}v is equivalent to Set kol- 
v<DV€Lv, Trouiordai and the following infinitives are felt to be 
dependent on a preceding Set ; with cfiepero) at d 4 he returns to 
the imperative. Cp. below 755 d 5. 

c 2. piDfxov : Stallb. refers to Pint. Them. ch. 17 and Pericles 
ch. 32 for instances of votes being placed on an altar. A corrupt 
vote would thus be sacrilegious. 

C 4. Kara ravra ovT(j}<i : the ovrios is used as in dkyjOios outw?. 

C 5. OTLirep . . . yeypafxfxevov : i.e. if any citizen took objection 
to any of the names proposed, he might submit it to publicly 
delivered magisterial decision. Any names to which such 
objections were sustained would be airoKpLdkvra. 

C 7. /x^ iXaTTov rpioLKovTa rfp^epwy : I think this does not 
mean " for a period of not less than thirty days," as most trans- 
lators take it — but "within as much as thirty days." He is to 
have full thirty days during which he may make his objection. — 
KptOevra kv 7rpwTot<s means the same as the subsequent Trpo- 
KptOevras at d 3, and the KptOcvra implies either that the names 
have not been objected to, or that the objection has not been 
sustained. There is naturally no power of objection at the two 
later stages of the election. 

d 1. (jikpeiv is used as at 756 c 2 — (^epetv kv^vqKovra fSovXevrds 
— here in the sense of " vote for" there in that of " elect by voting." 

d 4. €K Twv eKaTov goes with ov av jSovX.'qraL, not with o 
f^ovXrjOtLS (as Zeller). 

d 5. Sta Top,L(i}v iropev6pi.€vos : this further religious sanction 
makes the third and definite vote a still more solemn ceremony. 
Stallb. well cites Dem. Contra Aristocr. p. 642 ovSe rov TV\6vTa 
TLv' opKov TovTov 7rot7ya*€t dXX . . . (rrd<i €7rt rdv TOfiaov Kairpov 
KoX KpLOv Kol ravpov. 

d 6. The subject of <x7roc})rjvdvTCDv is ol a/o^ovres which we may 
supply from the tous dpxovras at c 8 which is the subject of the 
infinitives Set^at at c 8 and d 3. — Zeller not only makes the " semi- 
final" hundred elect the thirty-seven (from among themselves), but 
preside at the election as well ; i.e. he makes them the subject of 
dTro(f)r]vdvT(x}v. Ficinus goes further and makes the thirty-seven 
the subject of d7ro<f>rjvdvTMv ; i.e. he makes them return themselves. 
It is the absence, in a brand-new state, of proper presiding and 
returning officers which necessitates the arrangements i^ow to be 

550 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 753 d 

described atd 7 — 754 d 4. aTrocfirjvdvTiov is ^^appoint" cp. 767 b 3; 
not, as Jowett, ^^ proclaim.^' Kpivavres here (as Ritter says) = SoKtfxd- 
cravTe<g ; cp. below 755 d 6. 

d 7. TLves ovtv : the description given above applies to normal 
elections in the adult state. But *' in our state" — rjfxiv kv rfj TroAet — 
which is just beginning, there are no dpxovT€<s who can " publish " 
names, and of whom it can be said K/aiVavres d7ro<f)r]vdvrii)v dp)(ovTas. 
Some special provision therefore must be made of presiding 
magistrates for the first election of voiJio<f>vX.aK€<s. 

e 1. SoKLjxacriojv : Ritter aptly cites Deinarchus, Contra Aristog. 
§ 17, where the questions supposed to be asked at a SoKi/xaa-ta are : 
" Is he a good son ? Has he done his military duty ? Can he 
show any monuments to his ancestors ? " (reading y)pta) " Does he 
pay his taxes ? " The presiding magistrates' inquisition however 
would hardly extend, as Ritter thinks, to such questions of 
personal suitability for office as are described above at 689 c d. 

e 2. For TrpuJTov ovtio cp. above on c 4. 

e 4. Trphs Tracriov riov a/))(cuv : these words present great diffi- 
culty. Ficinus translates them ex omnibus magistratibus. But as 
yet there are no magistrates in the newly formed state. That is 
the cause of the difficulty in question. Ast, the Zurich edd., 
Wagner and Hermann adopt Cornarius's emendation of Trpos to 
Trpo. The words will then mean "before a single niagistrate has 
been elected." This gives a satisfactory sense, but it is hard to 
see how the easy Trpo could have been changed into the difficult 
7r/)05. Schneiders ingenious irpocrTacrwv twv dp\iov {^^ nndeT the 
presidency of the (proper) magistrates) " is palaeographically more 
likely, but does not give nearly so satisfactory a sense as Trpo 
iracrojv rcov a/a^wv. Stallbaum keeps Trphs Trao-wv twv dp)(^Q)V, 
translating "von Seiten aller Behorden." I am inclined to keep 
the MS. Trpos and translate " of all conceivable authorities there 
are none to be produced." (F.H.D. would follow the majority 
of edd. in reading Trpo.) — Badham's rewritten sentence, as so often 
in his case, while making excellent sense, does not fit in with the 
larger context. The following Set fxrjv a/xws ye ttws implies 
not a preceding " we must have," but a " we haven't." All 
Bdh. gives us is dvdyKrj rjfilv eiVai rtvas, otTtves eiev av Trpo 
TracTwv Ttuv dpxoyv yeyovores (deleto ovk ecm). — For ovk ccttlv . . . 
otTtvcs cp. Minos 320 a 2 ovk ecTtv otTLves aTre^ovrat crvpTvodnnv. 

e 6. I think Naber is right in rejecting the words kv rah 
Trapoi/xtats as a marginal comment. They are in an awkward 
position in the sentence. 

551 



753 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

e 8. TO 8' : best taken, as e.g. at 642 a, adverbially, "whereas." 

754 ^ •'•• ot^'^'o : i.e. TO ap^acrOaij or rrjv apyr^v. The two 
stages are distinct, as in the previous statement : " not only is 
any beginning," he says, " more than half the business, but a good 
beginning is beyond praise." Our " well begun is half done " 
modifies this in two directions. Cp. below 775 e 2. 

a 6. Ast tells us to take etVeiv with evTropOt (and consequently 
irXr^v as a preposition, and irpos to irapov closely with dvayKatov 
Kal (TvfJi(f)€povTos), and Ast (Lex.) and L. & S. s.v. quote Phaedr. 
235 a, as if it were ^viropdv ttoAAo, Xkyuv instead of iviropdv toG 
TroAXot Aeyeiv, in support of such a construction. It seems better, 
with Steph., to take irXr^v as a conjunction, and €ltt€iv as dependent 
on dvayKatov Kal o-vfxcfiipovTos — kvos being governed by evTropco. 
(The decision between the two grammatical views is so difficult 
that it is not surprising that Steph. forbears, as he says, to mark 
his own view by the punctuation.) 

b 1. TToAAat . . . ivtai is something like the conversational 
English " a good few." It is hard to say whether TroAAaKt? goes 
closely with evtat, or generally with the verbs of the sentence. 
Ficinus's simple multas ignores TroAAaKts eVtat altogether. — A 
came to grief both with KaTOLKLO-Oeio-Mv and KaToiKto-ao-ais, writ- 
ing first KaTOLKL(Te(i)v, then KaToiKKrOkvTiav for the former, and first 
KaTOLQ-dcrais and then KaTOLKTja-dcrais for the latter ; L and 0^ 
wrote the former correctly, L and have KaroiK-rja-da-aLs for the 
latter. 

b 3. vvv fiYjv €v Tw TrapovTL : the sentence thus begun is never 
finished ; d 8r) . , . yeyovora at b 7 ff. is a substitute for its con- 
clusion ; in other words a 8rf vvv " resumes " vvv fxr)v kv t(^ 
irapovTL. 

b 4. eV ye rfj Trapova-rj 7rat8tas diropta^ "while the helplessness 
of childhood lasts." I have followed Burnet in reading TratStas. 
Even if the MS. reading TratSetas be retained, it must still mean 
childhood (not, as Jowett, " while he is in want of education "). As 
to the form of the word cp. Schneider on Rejp. 537 c 1 and below, 
808 e 2 and 864 d 5. 

b 6. dvayKatov^ is the emphatic word, " finds allies solely 
among his own connexions." Ficinus's "ad suos semper refugiens 
in his solis praesidium reperit " suggests that possibly oiKetovs was 
a marginal interpretation of dvayKatovs. 

b 7. a : i.e. the mutual affection natural between young children 
and their parents, and the sense of dependence on the latter felt 
by the former. — KvitKrioL<i Sid rrjv tTrt/xeActav, " erga curatores eius 

552 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 754 b 

Gnosios" (Fie). Sea t. kir. does not (as Jowett) give the ground 
for the assertion ; it is rather " thanks to their care." 

C 1. vTrdp^etv iTotfiw^ yeyovora : for erot/^ws where we should 
have expected the adj. cp. 880 b 1. 

c 2. 6rJ L and 0'-^, and so Burnet ; for this Schneider adopts 
the ye of A and ; all other editors give the Sc of the early 
printed texts, Ficinus's igitur justifies Burnet's choice. 

C 4. The construction from irpocreXofx^vovs to cKaroi/ avS/Qtov is 
conversational — almost slipshod. — As this is a repetition of \privai 
. . . TavTijv at 752e4ff., we are bound to take Kotvy to mean 
" in conjunction with the colonists," for there we read kolv-q /xera 
rdv d({). els r. cr. t. In other words irpocreX. twv e6S t. utt. d^iKo- 
fxeviov explains KOivfj, and is a loose equivalent for fjberd tmv dcf>, 
ktA. at 752 e 5. (Steph. takes Kotvrj closely with Tr/ooo-eA-o/zei/ovs, 
placing the comma before it, instead of after.) 

c 8. The (Tvv- in the verb marks the contrast with the state 
of things described in d 2 ft'. Before, and during, the election the 
100 Cnossians and the 100 colonists act together. As soon as the 
colony's magistrates are duly appointed, the alliance ceases. 

d 4. Twv €. K. T. : for the partitive genitive as the predicate of 
eu/at or yiyvea-Oai Ast cps. 762 e 9, 948 b 1 (6 rov jxeyio-rov TLfxrj- 
/xaros), 950 e 2, 951c 7. 

d 5. €7rt ToicrSe : a little more than " for the following 
purjjoses " ; eiri has the notion of presiding over a certain province, 
as in the phrase tovs ctti rots Trpdyfxaa-Lv ovras in Dem. Phil. iii. 
110. 22. 

d 7. S)v, for €v ohj is not too " strong " an attraction for the 
conversational style of the present passage. — drro-, "duly." — roig 
dpxovcTL too is rather loose for " for the (proper) magistrates to 
keep " ; cp. above 745 0,6 rj Bk KTrja-is X^P'-'^ '^^^ KXrjpov . . . cv 
TO) (fiavepi^ y€ypd(f)d(D irapa 4>uXa^ii/ ap)(ou<ni'. 

d 8. 7rAr)i/ ktA. : the full construction would be iv w av 
dTToypdij/rj 6 p,kynrTov Tijxrjjxa e^wv to ttXtjOos rrjs avTov ovacas 
TrAr/v Terrdptiiv /xvwv. No man of the highest class would be held 
guilty of a misdemeanour if he had only understated his property 
by about £20. (Interpreters from Ficinus to Ast were content 
to hold Plato to have meant that the property of a man of the 
highest class was four viinae ; and that, as Hermann remarks 
{De vest, note 137), though a man of the highest class is said at 
948 b 1 to be liable to a fine of twelve minae for a single offence.) 
In keeping with the loose style of this whole passage is the 
careless arrangement of subject matter, involving a repetition (as 

553 



754 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Ritter points out) of much that we have had before in Bk. V. at 
pp. 744 d e, 745 a, (Schanz accepts Badham's suggestion that 
there is a lacuna after aTvoypaxprj.) 

e 4. 7r/)bs TovTO) Se ktX. : a comparison of 745 a shows us that, 
besides the confiscation of the offending sum, an equal sum was to 
be produced by the offender, half of which was to go to the 
informer, and half to Religion. 

e 8. For kv of the tribunal cp. 784 d 2 Iv SiKaa-TrjpLO) and Gorg. 
464 d (et 8€ol) ev Tratorl Stay (ovt^ecr Oat. 

755 ^ ^* -^^ ^^^ mention of rwv koiviov KTrjfxoiTuyv and Siavofi-q 
SLR Athenian citizen would think e.g. of the rents of the state 
silver mines, and of the Stw/^eAia. 

a 2. Tov kXi)pov is not governed by TrXi]v^ but by the notion 
^^ possessed of" to be supplied from a/xot/)09 ; after each distribution 
he is to be left possessed only of his original lot. 

a 7 flf. I believe that €J38ofx-JKovTa should be rejected, as also the 
(after a 4) quite unnecessary and very awkwardly expressed /xT^Kert 
. . . Siavo-qOrjTO}. With virepfSas we must from a 5 and 6 
supply TrevrJKovTa. This provides a natural explanation for the 
apparently tautological ttXcov vTrep/Sds ; the ttAcov is more than 
ten years.— Kara tovtov tov Xoyov provides an antecedent to ottcos, 
or, more strictly speaking, the antecedent to ottws is contained in 
the TOVTOV. We should say " and so, in proportion, according as 
the vofxoffivXa^ has gone further (than that) beyond (the age of 
fifty) " ; e.g. if sixty-two he has only eight years of office before 
him. (There seems no reason, with Hermann, to think ottoo-' a 
more likely expression here than oTrtos. — Apelt (p. 10) would read 
ttTra? for ottw?, putting a comma after it, and none before it. He 
justly points out that Kara tovtov tov Xoyov must mean some- 
thing more definite than ^^for this reason " ; it means " in this 
proportion " ; but I cannot follow him in his alteration and inter- 
pretation of the succeeding words. He translates from KaTo. to 
Suavorjd. "nach diesem Verhaltniss soil jeder (nicht bloss der 60- 
jahrige), wenn (av) er (beim Antritt des Amtes) schon fiber 60 alt 
die 70 erreicht, nicht langer daran denken, dies Amt zu verwalten." 
— F.H.D. also holds that irXeovvTrepf^ds means "having passed (sixty) 
hy more." Stallb. holds that oVws is " de tempore accipiendum," 
and translates " atque secundum hanc ration em, ubi quis hanc 
aetatem transgressus plus septuaginta annos vivat, ne jam cogitato 
etc.") — As Ritter points out (p. 157), it would not happen that 
exactly thirty-seven vo/xo<f>vXaK€'i would have to be chosen at every 
election, as the time of office would in many cases be shorter than 

554 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 755 a 

the maximum twenty years, and vacancies in the body would occur 
at irregular intervals. 

b 3 f . TO, rpta Trepl twi/ uofxo(f>vXdKwv irpocTTayyiara are, I think : 

(1) They are to have a general surveillance over the laws. 

(2) They are to have the charge of the property-registers. 

(3) They must form a court for the trial of the over-rich. 

b 5. €KacrTos : sc. vo/xo? ; each fresh law will give the vo^io- 
<f)vX.aK€<s some fresh work to do. 

c 1. The correction by A^ and 0^ of the more "elegant" 
mrr;/3€crtas to vTrrjp€Ta<i was very probably due to a previous 
marginal interpretation. 

C 3. olov Kat : Badham would change this to et Kai, under the 
impression that the ovofjia in question is (fivXap\0L, and that P. is 
thinking mainly of the first half of the compound. It looks though 
as if he were thinking rather of the second part — the -ap)(os. 
We may translate oh . . . iTrovofid^ova-L " to whom we may 
appropriately give just thai sort of title — in fact most people do 
call them ra^iap\oiy Ficinus has " quos merito multorum more 
praefectos ordinum nuncupabimus." — Plato will not propose quite 
sans phrase to adopt the Athenian titles. 

C 5. rrpo/SaXXccrOcDV : the vofxo<f>vXaK€s are to draw up a pre- || 
liminary list, i.e. a list of fit candidates for the office of crrparrjyos. 

d 2. tovt' avTO : i.e. the fact that he believes him to be the 
better man. 

d 3. (oTTOTC/oos S') av 86^7) Sta^ci/DOTOP'ou/xevos, " whichever of 
the two is fixed on by the public vote" (is to be added to the 
nominated list). 

d 6. SoKi/xacrOiVTOiv : generally (Ast, Wagner, and Stallb.) 
taken to be a gen. abs. without a subject ; "after they have passed 
the scrutiny." (Cp. below 829 d 5, Rep. 586 d, 590 d, Farm. 
137 c 2 dXX' kpuira ws dTroKpLva/jLevov.) But it is better to follow 
Ficinus in making t pet's (nom.) the subj. to the imperative 
SoKLfxacrdevTuyv ; tovtovs e^vat . . . TroXe/xov will then depend on 
the immediately preceding words oh . . . yiyvrjTaL which are 
equivalent to " about whom it is decided." 

d 6 flf. Ttt^. . . . irpof^dXXic-dai . . . StoScKa, {kKdarrj (fivXy 
Ta^iapxov) : this seems to be a loose expression for " they must 
provide themselves with a candidates list, with a view to the 
election of twelve taxiarchs." We are distinctly told in the sequel 
that the proceeding is to be identical with that followed in the 
election of the a-rpaTTjyoi There is to be a TrpofSoXrj, an 
opportunity for avTiTrpo/SoX/jj an kTri\€ipoTovLa and a SoKLfxacria 

555 



755 Ci THE LAWS OF PLATO 

(called here K/aio-i?). If, as is usually assumed, the generals are 
only to nominate twelve, the xetporovia would be a farce. (One 
way out of the difl&culty would be to suppose that each of the three 
generals is to produce a list of twelve candidates. But there is no 
hint of any limitation of the number of candidates in other cases, 
and the '■'■ one for each tribe^' could only apply to candidates on the 
further assumption that each general must choose one of his from 
each tribe. F.H.D. proposes to reject ra^iap\ov ; this would give 
us " twelve candidates out of each tribe.") 

e 1. €Kd(TTr) (jivky is the reading of L and Eus. It is strange 
that both A and should have the extraordinary kKdcrrr] <|)uXaKi], 
and that the corrector of A should have got no further than putting 
a " vitii nota " in the margin. 

e 2. Madvig was possibly right in inserting r) before twv, so as 
to bring the expression into line with that below at 756 a 7. 
Stallb. thinks both expressions allowable. 

e 4. Tov Se GrvX.Xoyov ktX. : the assumption that, in ordinary 
circumstances, no popular assembly could be convened except by 
the fSovXyj and its representative officials shows us Plato here 
writing as an Athenian for Athenians. The dramatic standj)oint 
,, is abandoned. Herm. {De vest. p. 39) says that for some points the 
Laws tells us more about Attic arrangements than we can get from 
any other source. 

e 8. TToiv oa-ov e/jLTToXifXiov is not, as L. & S., "all who are of 
military age" but, as 756 a 3 shows, "all who belong to the forces 
(in any capacity)." — The €(fi€^rjs tovtoi<s is not local — does not 
qualify Kadlcrai^ but kjXTroXkjxiov^ and takes the place of the word 
for " remaining " which we should expect : "all who after the 
cavalry and the hoplites have a claim to belong to the forces." — 
\€ipoTovovvr(}iv ktX. : " Unum tantum apud Platonem ab 
Atheniensium usu recedere videtur, quod taxiarchos a solis 
peditibus, hipparchos ab equitibus, inspectante tantum reliquo 
exercitu, creari jubet, quod Athenis ab universe populo factum esse 
constat " (Herm. De vest. p. 40). 

e 9. iTTTrdp^ovs 7ravT€s : this seems to be in direct contradiction 
to b 1 in the next page, where we are told that the cavalry is to 
elect the 'tTnrap^oL. Many ways out of the difficulty have been 
suggested. Stallb., Wagn., and Madvig, whom I follow, reject kol 
LTnrdp^ovi here ; Herm. rejects the account, given a few lines below, 
of the election of the hipparchs ; Bad ham would read vTrdpxovi 
— " vice-generals " — here. Possibly the fact that the hoplites 
looked on at the election may be thought to justify the Travres. 

556 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 756 a 

756 a 1. A further difficulty is presented by tovtols. If, like 
the similarly placed datives tovtols (755 b 8), avrolcrL (d 7), eavrots 
(756 a 3), it means "in subordination to," "as assistants to," and 
represents tht superior officers, there will be nothing to which this 
TovTots clearly refers — even though we do not remove the Kot 
linrdpxov^ with Stallb., Wagn., and Madvig. For this reason 
Madvig (followed by Schanz) proposed to take out the sentence 
(f>v\. . . . alpcLcrdij} and put it after tinrevovrdjv (b 3). An argu- 
ment against this is that at a 4 Plato seems to imply that the only 
election that had still to be arranged was that of the LirTrap^oi, 
whereas, by this arrangement, the <^v\apyoi are left out as well. 
Of course Hermann's athetesis of linrdpyoiv . . . linrevovrisiVy if 
accepted, cuts away the ground for Madvig's transposition. The 
difficulty is best met, I think, by Ast's proposal to read avToh for 
av TovTOLs. (If the MS. text be left unaltered, we must suppose 
that its contradictions and irrelevancies are due to the absence 
of the author's final revision. — F.H.D. would reject av tovtols.) 
— (t7^v dcnriSa) tlO€/j.€vol : not, as Ast, for ir€pLTi6kfx€voi, " sibi 
induentes" but the same technical use which occurs above at 
753 b 6, i.e. " serving as hoplites." 

a 6. The MSS. and the early printed edd. all had avriPoXriv for 
dvTiirpofSokrjv, though the early translators got the meaning right. 
Ast was the first to correct the error. 

b 5 f. If, after the second recount (i.e. the third count), the 
decision as to which two candidates had the largest number of 
votes was challenged, the tellers were to settle the matter by 
voting among themselves. The Aldine edition was doubtless right 
in correcting the MS. tovtols (assimilated) to tovtovs. — olcnrep 
Trj<s \€ipoTovLa<i ^iypov €Kd(TTots CKacTTOv rjv : a strange expression : 
" to whom severally in each case had fallen the duty of counting 
the hands held up." fxkrpov iX^iv tt/jos at 836a is "to provide 
a curb for," "to account for," "to be competent to deal with," and 
so fierpov ccttIv avruJ Trjs \€LpoTOVLas might well mean " it is his 
duty to deal with the votes." This expression would fit in 
particularly well where the duty was one of counting. — eVacrToi/ 
€Kao-Tots might mean that a separate set of tellers were appointed 
for each count, or merely that separate tellers dealt with separate 
bodies of voters. — If these tellers were merely required to settle 
among themselves what the result of the voting had been, they 
would only be resaying what they had said before. Evidently the 
election was put into their hands by the challenge of the third count. 
(The general view is that the words denote the presiding magistrates.) 

557 



756 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

b 8. yiyvoiVTo av irpkirovres rais SiavofxaiSj "will form a con- 
venient number for our subdivisions " (e.g. the 7rpvTdv€L<s). 

c 1. I think Stallb. and all other interpreters (except Ast) are 
wrong in taking tovto)v to depend on tov apt^/xov, and that it 
depends on fJ'Cpr)^ while tov dpidfjiov (if genuine) qualifies the 
numeral as at Phil. I7cl2 OTrocra to-rt tov dpLdfiov. Ast, quite 
unnecessarily, substitutes ovt(})<s for tovtwv, appealing for support 
to Ficinus's ita ut — " et in quattuor partes per nonaginta dis- 
tribuatur, ita ut a censibus singulis consiliarii nonaginta ferantur." 
— A change I would suggest is the rejection of the words Kara 
evev-qKovra tov dpcOfxov. In view of the next sentence they are 
superfluous, and they are awkward. An arithmetically minded 
commentator may well have added the words in the margin. 

C 3. fi€ytcrT(x)v here, and o-p-iKporaTov at d 1 and d 3, refer of 
course, not to the numbers of the classes, but to the amount of the 
property -qualification. We must translate by "highest" and 
" lowest." He seems to use the plural and singular indifferently 
in the same sense. — aTravTas : the same as iravra dvSpa at e 4. 
Apparently the whole community, not only the soldiers, as in the 
case of the election of magistrates (753 b 5). — At the first reading 
it looks as if from each class, on its election-day, ninety senators 
were chosen. But when we come to the fifth day, and the final 
election, we find that it is possible, out of the number voted for 
out of each class, to select 180. The first voting, therefore, must 
have been a TrpofSoXij like the first voting in the case of the 
vofio(j>vX.aK€<; described at 753 c, where everybody wrote the name 
of the man he wanted to elect. 

C 4. ry So^dcrr) ^rjfjLia : the same as what, at e 1 and e 5, is called 
7] 7rpu>T7j (rj/jLta. (We may guess it to have been three drachmas.) 

C 6. KaTo, ravrd KaOdirep rrj Trpocrdev : i.e. on this, as on all 
the days, the whole community voted. At Pol. 1266 a 14 ff., Aristotle 
describes the arrangement for the election of the /SovX-j given in 
Plato's Laws. At e 16 he gives L(Tov<i (i.e. jSovkevrds) as represent- 
ing this Kara ravrd k. r. tt. Either^ then, Aristotle made the same 
mistake as Muretus, Stallb., and others — i.e. understood the fixed 
number of ninety senators to have been elected on each day — or 
Nickes is right in emending tcroDS to t'o-tus. (See Susemihl and 
Hicks ad loc.) 

elf. We may conclude that, on the third day, when the 
candidates from the third class were being nominated, a member of 
the third class who failed to vote was fined double the Trpwrrj 

558 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 7566 

e 3. ISiLV stands for c^a-re tSeiv ; cp. -qfxcpovv 890 c 8, also 
759 d 8, 857 a 6, and 917 e 6. 

e 4 f . (f)ip€LV 8' Ik TOVTijiv av iravTa avSpa : it is not easy to 
see why this second election took place. Why not take from each 
class the 180 who had most votes (i.e. nominations) at the first 
election ? Perhaps it was intended to give those citizens who had 
voted for themselves, and saw it was no good, a chance of voting 
for someone else. The only difference between the two elections 
would be that on the fifth day the members of the two lowest 
classes would be compelled to vote, whereas on the third day the 
fourth class, and on the fourth day the third and fourth classes were let 
off, if they liked — the principle being that the classes are to be fined 
which would be most likely to be defaulters. The publication of 
the first list would show who were the likely candidates, and the 
third and fourth classes would, on the fifth day, have the opportunity, 
as Ritter says (p. 159 f.), of upsetting a previous decision of (mainly) 
the two higher classes. Aristotle's account (e 19 f.) of what happened 
on the fifth day is very inadequate. As to his further conclusion 
that there will be "more," and "better," men from the "highest 
class," if he means more (definitely elected) senators^ he has misread, 
or misremembered Plato's account. If he means " more " among 
the nominated candidates, it is hard to see, even if it were so, how 
it would much affect the final result ; for each class must have 180 
representatives. S. and Hicks take it to mean "more" voters. 
But is it likely that abstentions would be bo frequent in the fourth, 
and far more numerous class, as to reduce the number of voters 
below that of the highest ? 

e 5. As at e 1 in the previous page, L alone has the correct 
reading (cKAe^avras where A and 0^ had cKAe^avres). 

e 7. diroKXrjpcocravTas : the introduction of the lot would 
confound the machinations of such a " caucus " as Aristotle {Pol. 
ii. 1266 a 27) deprecates in the election of magistrates. 

e 10. •i^s aet Set p,€cr€V€Lv : cp. above 693 d 8 Sel Srj ovv kol 
dvayKatov /xcTaAa/^eiv dpcfjotv tovtoiv, eiTrep eXevOepia t ccrrat 
Kttt (fnkta p€Ta (ftpovija-iois. — The ■^s is a curious case of attraction ; 
in sense it stands for (5v, but is attracted into the number of the 
immediately preceding TroAtrcia?. 

757 ^ 2. The MS. StayopevoixevoL looks like the right word, 
and Stobaeus's SiayopevoL and Boethius's (Photius and Suidas) 
Staycvo/xevot like imperfect recollections of it. It is used, as 
8t€t7r€tv often is, in the sense of pronoxmce — avayopevd/xevoi, which 
Badham proposes to substitute for it here, is announce, 'proclaim — 

559 * 



757 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

and with the three preceding words is equivalent to our phrases 
" being placed in the same class," " being judged to deserve equal 
honour." We may translate : " slaves and masters will never make 
friends, nor will worthless and worthy to whom equal honour is 
awarded — for equal treatment results in inequality when it is 
given to what is unequal — unless given in a due measure — and 
both those two false relationships are the fruitful sources of civic 
discord." tols dvtcrois is not, as Wagner takes it, an instrumental 
dative — "durch das Ungleiche" — but a common dative of the 
recipient. 

a 3. el jxr) rvyx^voL rov fxerpov : the really equal treatment 
is that which takes cognizance of the inequality of the recipients ; 
so we read above at 744 c 2 that if honour and power are bestowed 
with discrimination, they are bestowed with real equality (ws 
la-alrara). We use the same metaphor, in almost the same 
phrase, when we talk of a man's being " equal to " or " unequal to " 
his position or his task. — Proper weight should be assigned to 
the Tvyxo.voL ; the idea of due proportion is contained partly in 
the verb, which means to " hit the mark" (Campbell, on Politicus 
284 d, says of this passage: "here we seem to find the point of 
transition from the Platonic to the Aristotelian jxecroTiqs.") 

a 4. SloL . . . d/x<^oT€/)a Tavra : not, as Jowett, equality and 
inequality, but, as Ritter (p. 161 f.), the two varieties of dvia-OTiqs 
which are found, one in the (T(f)68pa SovXeia or SetrTroTCia of 
absolute rule, and the other in the crcpoSpa kXevOepta of complete 
democracy. Both these relationships provoke rebellion in different 
ways. Both are equally unstable political conditions, because 
incompatible with the (jiiXia without which we have often been 
told that no community can cohere. (Cp. 693 b 4, 697 c 9, 699 c 1, 
701 d 9, 743 c 6.) 

a 5-C 6. TraAaios . . . Kara Aoyov, " There is real philo- 
sophy in the true old saying that equality is the mother of 
friendship, but the ambiguity as to which kind of equality it is 
which has this effect leads to grievous mistakes. There are two 
sorts of equality, which go by the same name, but in action pro- 
duce in many cases virtually opposite results. Any ordinary 
state or lawgiver can employ the one in bestowing dignities. All 
that is necessary is to use the lot, and so distribute them by the 
indiscriminate impartiality of numbers and scale. But the truest 
and best kind of equality is hidden from the ordinary sight. 
None but the divine eye can discern it. Man's vision cannot 
penetrate far enough to help him much, but what he cau see of 

560 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 757 a 

it is of priceless value to states and to individuals. To the 
greater it gives more, to the lesser less, adapting its gift in due 
proportion to the nature of each, and when it comes to honours, 
it assigns the higher ones to those whose worth is higher, and 
whenever it deals with those who are deficient in disciplined virtue 
it gives them their fit share, all in due proportion " (reading 
cKacTTOTe in c 5). 

a 5. la-oT'qs (fiLXorrjTa aTrepya^erat : this proverb, says Plato, 
might seem to prove that if men are placed on an equal footing, 
they must thereby be made friends. In effect, he says, this result 
would only follow if they are rightly so placed. In other words, 
the real meaning of the proverb is no more than " like will to 
like." 

b 4. /jtcT/oo) . . . KOi (TTadfiM Kttt dpid/iiM I what Lord Acton 
(Fr. Rev. 161) calls "by coarse and obvious arithmetic." 

b 6. In just this spirit Sir Henry Taylor's Philip van Artevelde 
says : " The world knows nothing of its greatest men." So, too, 
Coleridge : 

** It sounds like stories from the land of spirits, 
If any man obtain that which he merits, 
Or any merit that which he obtains." 

(Cp. Aristotle on to SiavefirjTLKhv SiKatov in Eth. Nic. v. 1131b 
27.) 

b 7. The scholiast on Gorg. 508 a (rj Io-ottjs rj yeoyjxeTpLKrj kol €V 
OeoiS Kal ev dvOpwirofs /xeya Swarat) says : tovt€(ttlv rj SLKaLOcrvvq' 
Tavrrjv Se ttjv yciDfJLerpLKrjv dvaXoyiav Atos K/otcrtv ev No/xots 

€Kd\€(T€Vj (OS 8l aVTTJS T(x)V TrdvTiOV K€Kpip€VOiV T€ Kttt <j)pi(rfl€V(DV. 

act is almost " as a matter of fact." 

b 8. The subject of kirapKd is not la-oTrjs, nor Ato? Kpicns, but 
tcroTJ^Tos KpLori^ the power of discerning the true equality, whereby 
each man would be treated proportionally to his merit. — 
irdv ocTOv dv kirapKicrrj : lit. " every bit of help it gives." 

C 5. a/DCT'JJs T€ Ktti TratSet'a? is a kind of hendiadys — " dis- 
ciplined virtue " ; the great object of all training is dper-q. 
— It is quite possible that, in order not to overweight the 
sentence, Plato did not complete the parallel, but left what was 
missing to be extracted from the general summary that follows. 
Steph., however, thought that some words must have fallen out 
after TratSetas, and Ast thinks they were rjTTOvs StSovo-a. Schanz 
marks a lacuna after TratScta?. Ficinus translates : " minoribus 
autem virtu te et disciplina minores." I suspect that we ought 
to read iKao-Tore for eKarcpocs (due to the preceding eKarc/oo)) ; 

VOL. I 561 2 o 



757 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

then all is in order. (F.H.D. would keep kKarepoi% but put a 
dash after TratSetas.) — For Kara Xoyov see above on 755 a 7 Kara. 
TOVTOV rov Xoyov. 

C 6. ea-Ttv yap ktA., " denn es ist doch wohl aucb. die Staats- 
klugheit fiir uns stets das Recbt an sicb " (Wagner). Plato will 
not recognize a statecraft that is not founded on just principles. 
— " Honesty is the best policy " is another variant of the same 
theme. 

d 2. raTJTov TovTo : i.e. the " just policy " just enunciated as 
such, and expressed in the next line but one by the words to 
SiKaiov. — a-K07rov/ji€vov Trpos is " in the interest of." 

d 3. For the r) . . . ti cp. above on 643 b 8. 

d 4. TO Kara <^vcriv idov avicrois eKacTTOTe SoOev, " the sort 
of equality meted out by Nature's decree to the unequal " ; lctov 
here is used in the sense of ^^fair." 

d 5 ff. dvayKULov ye firjv ktX. : as Ritter says (p. 163), 
dvayKalov here has somewhat the meaning " the best we can 
do"; this use is further discussed in his note on p. 173, where 
he refers, among other passages, to 628 d 1, and e 6 below. — ttoXlv 
airaa-av : not, I think, as Jowett, " every city," but as Wagner, 
" der gesammte Staat " ; the implication is that the state need iiot 
be so precise in its use of terms as the individual. We may 
translate : " When, however, a community as a whole applies 
these terms" — those of natural equality and civic justice — " it must 
be content sometimes to use them in a modified sense unless it is 
willing to admit a certain amount of civic discord in its midst — 
(all) equity and indulgence are infractions of the ^perfect and strict rule 
of justice" — (the last words in italics are Jowett's). (F.H.D. 
and A.M. A. prefer " every state " for tt. dir.) 

d 6. Trapiovv/xioLa-i : predicative. The relaxation from the true 
sense of the word 1(t6t7]<s is in the direction of the spurious lo-oti^s 
which holds that all men have an equal right to power and 
honour. As explained at 756e5ff., such an equal chance is to 
be given within a strictly limited area. 

el. yap is not "for," but "you know." Burnet properly 
indicates the relation of this clause to the preceding one by 
marking it as a parenthesis. The reasons why the lot is to be 
introduced into the political machinery are threefold : (1) because 
man's judgement of character and worth cannot be trusted very 
far (b 7) ; (2) because the temper of both rulers and ruled will not 
always stand the strain of the position (e 4) ; and (3) because, by 
so doing, we invoke the guidance of Heaven (e 4 f.). Of these 

562 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 757 e 

reasons the second is explicitly stated, the two others indirectly 
indicated. 

e 3. Tw Tou KXrjpov i(T(i) : spoken of above at b 4 as the lororr;? 
which is fx€Tpio koI a-Tad/xM /cai dpidfiw. (The irpoa- in the verb 
at d 6 and e 3 possibly implies that where the agency of the lot 
is used, it is an accessory, not the main instrument.) 

e 4. ^eov Ktti ayadriv rv\7]v : it will be remembered that, in 
the enumeration of the d^nofMara a/3X^5, the lot was spoken of 
(at 690 c 5) as BiOfjaXris and €vrv\ris. 

758213. rriv fxeWovcrav (Ti^^ea-dat. . . . iroXtv : cp. Rep. 543 a 1 
T^ ^eAAoiVry ttfc/ows oIkclv TroAct. 

a 6. Twv aAAwv TToAewv : gen. of definition ; the foreign states, 
with which ours is brought in contact, are represented as so many 
threatening billows on the wide sea of international politics. Of 
the numerous poetical and rhetorical passages which compare the 
st^e to a ship, Aesch. Septem 2 perhaps comes nearest to this in 
combining a reference to the need of sleepless vigilance on the 
part of the authorities : 

Ferris <f)v\d<T(ret Trpdyos ev w^Ofivri Tr6\e(as 
otaKa vwfiCov p\i<f>apa fir] KOLfxCov virvi^. 

— When using Kvjxa in a metaphor (as at Ee^. 457 b, 473 c and 
611 d, Tim. 43 b, and Laws 740 e 8) Plato thinks of a wave as 
bursting on or flooding the land ; KXv^oiv represents danger at sea. 
— SLayofxevr) : as Adam says (on Rep. 344 e), this is probably not 
a middle used in the sense of the act. Staywv (intr.), but a passive 
of the active use given at L. & S. s. v. § III. The notion is that of 
a wind-driven ship. 

a 7. oLK€Lv is hardly more than live^ pass its time (as a city), 
as in the passage quoted above on a 3. The €v kXv8(i}vl Stayo/xcyTy, 
06K€i, and dXiCTKecrdai show that Plato was no more averse than 
Shakespeare from a mixture of metaphors. 

a 8. (TwdirTav is best taken to be intransitive here ; otherwise 
we must suppose a very awkward change of subject between avv- 
ctTTTetv and Xi^yecv — w^hich are connected by t€. Cp. Ep. 353 a 6 
(TVvaTTTei 81 del TraAaia TcXevrrj SoKOVcra dp\rj (pvofievrj V€(^. 

b 2. TrXrjOos : not the multitude — the common people, as 
opposed to the rulers (as Ast and Wagner) — but a large number 
(of rulers, or counsellors). 

b 4. The S-t], which Ast and Hermann substitute for Se, makes 
an awkward asyndeton. The slight irregularity caused by the 
introduction of two consecutive co-ordinate clauses by 8c may be 

563 



758 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

rendered in English by beginning the second with " No." — rhv 
TrXeicTTov Tov xpovov : Burnet is the first editor who has ventured 
to restore the idiomatic rov of A and for the vulgate to. 

b 6. Though at d 3 he calls this twelfth part of the PovX-q rh 
TrpoKaOrj/jievov rrjs TroAews, he does not until 760 bl use for 
them the Athenian term Trpvrai/ets. 

b 7. €v €(fi' €1/1, " severally "(lit. ev fxepos e^' hi /xtjvl). (Fie. 
takes it to mean " one (part) after another.") — The avrovs which 
Steph. and Ast print for the MS. avrovs involves a change of 
subject for the infin., which is the more awkward because vet/xavras 
manifestly agrees with the vague " they " or " we " which is the 
subj. of edv. (If not, they ought to have printed avrwv as well.) 

C 1-5. lovTt T€ . . . 'Ta<s aTTOK/oicrets : Plato's preference for 
a chiastic arrangement makes it probable that the ayyeAAetv is 
supposed to be the task of the man e^ avrrjs rrys TroAecus, while 
the 7rvvOdv€(rdaL takes place at the interview with the Iovtl tivi 
TTodev dkXodev. 

C 2. €Tot/x(os €7riTvx€tv, " SO as to meet at short notice," is 
epexegetic to Trctpk^eiv avrovs (fivXaKas. (H. Richards would 
read kTocp^ovs. It is hard to see how so simple a reading as 
that could have been altered to the more difiicult — and recherche 
— adverb.) 

d 1. For /xaAiorra juev, "if possible," cp. 830d4; literally it 
is ^^for choice." — on Td\i(jTa qualifies al(rOofji€vr]s ; the early 
revelation of a seditious plot is of cardinal importance. 

d 2. Winckelmann's St* a explains the MS. Sid — which the vul- 
gate Sto does not — and has been rightly approved by Wagner, and 
adopted by Schanz and Burnet. — crvXXoywv re . . . Kal SiaXvcrecov : 
cri'AAoywv, as Burnet writes it, is the proper correlative to 
8taXv(r€(ov ; i.e. the opposite of a StaAvcrts is not a o-vAAoyos but a 
crvAAoy>^. The Greeks kept the two senses of our convocation 
distinct. Besides, this correction supplies Trpoa-TmrTovcri^v with 
a second fem. noun to agree with it. — These same presiding 
magistrates — this standing committee of the jSovXrj — is to have 
the power of convoking and proroguing all state meetings, 
regular, or extraordinary. — It is doubtful whether rrjs ttoAcws 
depends on irpoKad-qp^evov, or on (TfAAoywv /cat StaAvo-ewv — 
probably on the former, in its technical sense of preside^ as at 
Aristot. Pol. vi. 1322bl4 rj TrpoKaO-qraL tov ttAt^^ovs. 

e 2. 'qvLKa is temporal ("now that," "as soon as ever"), not 
causal, as Ficinus, Serranus, and Jowett. It may be doubted 
whether Plato ever uses -^viKa in a causal sense ; but when used 

564 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 758 e 

temporally with a perfect tense, as here, it is nearly causal. — We 
shall learn at 760 b why the twelvefold division of the country 
and city (cp. above 745 b 6 ff.) was an important preliminary to 
the appointment of various magistrates. 

e 4. oiKrj(r€(j}v is "private houses" oiKoSofxioiv "public buildings" 
As to the former, doubtless no houses could be built in any 
situation or style that was not approved of by the city ofl&cials. 
At Pol. vL 1821bl9 Aristotle speaks of 17 twv irepl to oxttv 
hrjiioa'niiv KoX ISl(i)V (cTrt/xeAeia), ottws (VKocrfiia rj. 

759 a 1. The usual chiasmus; the subject coming last in the 
previous enumeration is dealt with first. — vewKopov? re koI lepcas 
KOL l€p€La<s : here the priesthood is supposed to be separate from the 
office of v€(i>Kopos ; below at b 3 f. the offices are joined. Cp. Arist. 
Pol. vi. 1322 b 22 o-v/x/^aivet §€ ttjv CTrt/xeAecav ravr-qv €Via\ov 
ficv CLvat fjLiav, otov €v rats fiiKpals ttgAco-iv, €VLa)(ov 8e TroAAas 
KOL Ke)(^(i)pLcrp.€va<s Trj<s L€p(i)(rvvy]<Sj oiov . . . vao^vXaKa^. (There 
is no need to bring the two passages into line by rejecting, with 
Badham and Schanz, the t€ Kai in a 1.) 

a 2. 68 wi/ : this and the following genitives may be said to 
depend on apyovrinv (^tSr)) at a 6, or to be assimilated to the 
genitives in e 5 above. 

a 3. Kocrixov Tov Trepl ra to lavra : e.g. at Athens the aa-rvvopoi 
had the superintendence of the scavengers (Boeckh, P.E. p. 204 
Eng. Trans.), though the word K6(riio<i^ as at line 8 below, has a much 
wider signification ; in the latter case the officials' duties extended 
to the regulation of trade. 

a 5. Koi TTjOoacTTeta) : at Athens (wrrwo/xot and dyopavo/xoL were 
regularly appointed, five for the city, and five for the Piraeus. — 
ra irpoa-r^KovTa TroAccrtv, " the stateliness and decorum of a city." 

a 6. kXka-dat Set : Stobaeus, whose quotation begins with the 
word cAeo-^at, puts in a Se before the Set — evidently to round oft* 
the quotation. Schanz, however, accepts the Se as part of the 
original, and, like Ast (who rejects See), founds on it the (not 
unnatural) conclusion that the previous text is deficient. Ast 
supposes that before eAeo-^at has fallen out a reference to the duties 
of the ayopavopLOL ; but this, as Stallb. says, is refuted by the fact 
that TO vvv^r] Xe^Bkv is declared to belong only to the dcTTWo/jioi. 
If the text is sound, we must suppose the rpta ctSrj to include the 
temple officials. In that case we have again a reverse chiasmus. 
At a 1 ff. the temple officials were named first, and the police last ; 
now the city and market police are dealt with first, and the temple 
officials last. 

565 



759 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

a 7. eTTovo/xa^ovra : the last time we had a participle so 
describing the action of the agent (i/et/xavras 758 b ; cp. also 757e 5 
eTTiKaXovixevovs) it was in the plural — possibly agreeing with an 
imaginary i^/xas ; here, as at b 8 and c 1 below, it is singular — 
used, apparently, of a single vofjuoOkTrfs — or, perhaps, merely nvd 
or o-€ is to be supplied. 

a 8 ff. lepQiv Sfi . . . Tois ^€015, "temple priests or priestesses whose 
office is hereditary must not be removed ; but if, as may well 
happen with such appointments in the case of newly settled people, 
either no temple or only a few temples (have priesthoods), to any 
which are unprovided with them priests and priestesses must be 
appointed to undertake for the deities the charge of the shrines." 
With ixrjScvi and tutlv oAtyots we must supply Upoya-vvat cio-tv 
from the previous sentence. — oh f^r) Kadca-ri^KOL is literally " to 
any " (? le/aots ; Stallb. and F.H.D. say Oeoh) " to which appointment 
should not have been made." Its meaning is made clear by the 
following Karaa-rarkov (Upeas). KadkcTTrjKa is virtually the perf. 
pass, of KaOiCTTrjiJLi. It is here used as an impersonal passive like 
7r€7r6vy]Tai at Phaedr. 232 a 4 or the Thucydidean (eTretS?) avToi<i) 
irapea-Kevaa-To (i. 46). (Many emendations of the passage have 
been proposed. H. Steph. would read oAtyto-rots for oAiyois oh. — 
I think Ast was the first editor to put a comma after oAiyois. — 
Ast would read lepojo-vvr]^ 0. Apelt ot/xat, Wagner otrta TLfxr] for 
oh firj, Orelli ocrta for oh, while Schanz rejects oh p-y) KaOecrTrjKOL 
altogether. Stallb. and Wagner take p,rj8€Vi and oktyois rtcrt to 
be not temples but people (and so F.H.D.), in which case elcrlv 
irarptai lepioa-vvai has to be supplied.) — Hermann was the first to 
remove the (.) or (•) from after Upeas in a 8 and put it after 
dyopavopLovs.- — Trar/otai is used in the sense of TrarpiKai (which 
Ast would substitute for it). 

b 1. As above at 754 b 1 and 755 e 1, L alone seems in ah 
to have preserved the true reading. Schanz does not note the fact 
that A reads a?. 

b 4. The sentence toutwv . . . €it) comes almost as a parenthesis 
in the middle of the directions about the priesthood ; hence the 
asyndeton — which Herm. wanted to remove by reading Se for 67). 

b 6. p.iiyvvvra<i : there is a double laxity in the use of this 
word : (1) it is plur. whereas the corresponding participles on each 
side of it — eTrovo/xa^ovra, kmrpkirovTa, and aTroStSovra — are sing. ; 
and (2) the inf. KaTao-r-^o-at, with the subj. of which it is supposed 
to agree, is not there, but has to be evolved mentally as the equi- 
valent of kv rats KaTadTdanTL (cp. below 760 e 6). — 8rjp.ov kol p,rj 

666 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 759 b 

SijfjLov : the discussion on p. 767 has prepared us to associate the 
lot with Kpdros Si^fxov rt (d 3). Hence I am inclined to think 
that 87Jfio<s is not a local division here (as Stallb.), nor merely, as 
Ritter (p. 163), F.H.D., and A.M.A., vulgus (Ficinus's plebs\ but 
a, democratic form of government, as at Aristot. Pol. iii. 1277 b 3, where 
he talks of 6 ecrxaros 8rJixo<s. The word is used almost in this 
sense above at 714 d 1 Srjfxov i/tKr^o-avra, r| riva TroXtreiav aXXrjv. 
In no other way, I think, can its proper meaning be assigned to 
fxeiyvvvras or to /xr) Srjfxov. — By Trpos cfyiXiav dXXrjXoi^ Plato 
signifies that the partial employment of democratic methods would 
please the TrXrjdos, and prevent friction between difterent classes. 
The words in b 5 admit of the supposition that, as in the case 
of the Senate's election, both principles might be combined. Ast 
takes the passage to mean that the Astynomoi and Agoranomoi 
were elected entirely by vote, the priests by lot. 

b 7. €1/ iKacTTr) . . . TToAet must mean, in this connexion, in 
each urban division (as opposed to the rural divisions). — The same 
mixed principle of election is to be applied both in town and 
country. — For ctr; (Ast would read fj) cp. Goodwin, M. and T. § 330. 
— The MS. ofxovoiov has nothing but Stj/jlos to agree with it. It 
would avoid a good deal of difficulty if we could read ofiovowv 
(gen. plu. of ofxovoos) for ofxovoojv, or read ofxovowa-Lv instead of 
o/xovowv €tr]. Ficinus has "ni maxima sit in omnibus consensio." — 
TO, Twv te/aecuv ( = rovs Upeas:) is governed by KXrjpovv. 

b 8. Tw d€(Z . . . ytyvecrdai, " leaving it to the god to secure 
that the appointment should be such as to please hi/tn^^ (not 
merely "leaving it to the god himself"). We may conclude from 
this that the lot was to be either the main or the sole agent of the 
priests' election. 

C 3. oiKT^crewv : not " families " (as Jowett), though it comes to 
much the same thing; a*s at Phaedo 58 b the city, and at 947 d 
below a funeral ceremony, are said KaOapevecv, so here the dwellings 
of the priest's father's and mother's families are considered as 
capable of pollution. 

c 4 f . Se seems here to be used with the force of the not un- 
common Sc 8r^ ; " and in fact he himself, and his father and his 
mother likewise (Kara Tavrd — cp. 753 a 9) — must have lived free 
from all taint of blood -shedding or any such offence against Heaven." 

c 6. Here again L seems alone to have avoided the extra- 
ordinary blunder of h^vrkpr^v for Se \pr] vo-. 

c 7. AlS to the office of i^rjyrjrrjs — " interpres religionum " — cp. 
Ruhnk. Tim. s.v. 

567 



759 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 1. TovTOi<s : i.e. to 19 vo/jlols. 

d 2. fir) 'ikaTTov i^yKovra: Hermann, De vest p. 41, says this 
restriction is the only point on which Plato ditfers from general 
Greek usage in the matter of the priesthood. — The following 
words, especially the iKavws, admit of the supposition that there 
might be some younger priests not fully qualified. 

d 5-e 1. Adopting A^ and 0^'s correction of rpis for rpets 
(Ficinus has ^^ter") in d 6, we may (freely) translate: "Four out 
of the twelve tribes are on three (separate) occasions to elect (by 
voting) four men, each from themselves, and after duly examining 
(and therel5y definitely appointing) the three (from each lot of 
four) who get most votes, must send (the remaining) nine to 
Delphi (for the oracle) to pronounce for one out of each lot of 
three" (i.e. the set elected by each group of four tribes). The 
€^ avTiov (d 6) leaves us in doubt whether each voter could only 
vote for men of his own tribe, or for any members of the four 
tribes of which his own was one ; probably the former was the 
case. — The association of the tribes into three separate, probably 
territorial, voting-bodies of four tribes each may have been meant 
to secure that the final six should not all come from the same 
part of the country. The SoKLfxaa-ia is to take place in the case 
of these as well, and all vacancies occasioned either by failure to 
pass it, or by death, are to be filled — not by Delphi, but by the 
original voting-bodies — from the same source from which the 
defaulter came (e 1-3). 

d 8. aveAeiv = wcTTe aveXetv, " oraculo designari " (Ast) ; the 
technical expression for the pronouncement of the oracle. The 
early printed edd. up to Stejjh. had a^eAeiv, but not Stob. or any 
MS. — If this explanation is right the total number of e^r/yT/rat 
would be six, of whom three only would be chosen by Delphi. 
(Ritter would retain r/aets in d 5 and read rerpaKLS for Terra/aas, 
or else thinks that these three latter ones form the whole body, 
and so F.H.D. ; but SoKLjxda-avTas is against this, as also the oh av 
TrXeia-rr] ykv. \pri<^os.) 

e 1. rov y^povov rrjv rjXiKiav, "the age-limit." 

e 2. Tov AtTTovra {Trpoaipua-Boycrav)^ " (elect) the missing man " ; 
we should say " fill the vacancy." The main point is not in the 
word for elect^ therefore it seems unnecessary, with Herm., to 
make it more significant and apposite by reading Trpo&aLpetcr- 
diocrav. 

e 3. re 8ij, as 0^ would write it — probably on some authority — 
seems more appropriate here than Se 8ij. 

568 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 7596 

e 5. TovTOiv : i.e. twv re/xevcoK — Coupled as it is with KapTrwv, 
/jLLcrOiocreiov here probably means reiits — doubtless grazing rents. 

760 a 1. Twy fxey L(Triiiv Tifn]/xdT(DV : plur. for sing, as at 763 d 
6 and 756 c 3. 

a 3. KaOaTTCp rj twv crTparrjyCjv kytyv^TO : cp. above 755 c f. 

a 7. For TTipl c. gen. as a substitute for an objective gen. see 
above 685 c 2. — For Tavry followed by an explanatory clause cp. 
687 e 8 TOVTO Se . . . ev^ccrdai Selv . . . oVtus vovv e^et. 

b 1. 7r/otTav€cov : see above on 758 b 6. 

b 4. Eusebius has veveixijcrOio for veve/xi^rat. Plato doubtless 
wrote the latter. He has twice before mentioned the division of 
the rural territory into twelve equal parts (745 c 1 and 758 e 3). 
An author quoting the passage would be likely to bring this verb 
into line with the imperatives which follow. — (fivXrj 8e : as at 
Athens, " the tribe, as a whole, did not correspond with any con- 
tinuous portion of the territory " (Grote, Hist. ch. xxxi. p. 60). The 
assigning of a definite portion of country to a tribe by lot is an 
ad hoc arrangement — for organizing the rural police. Moreover, 
it will be seen that the arrangement only holds for a month. The 
twelvefold division of the land for administrative purposes has 
already been referred to at 745 e 1 ; they were probably wedge- 
shaped districts arranged round the city as a centre — as is implied 
by kvkXo} at d 1. 

b 5. KttT* cvtavTov : either these words are not Plato's, or they 
were written before he had matured the plan explained at d 2- 
e 3 ; for they are irreconcilable with that on any interpretation. 
I would therefore bracket them. 

b 6. oiov : this rather strange qualification is perhaps due to 
the fact that the officials have two titles given them. — Hermann's 
conjecture that the MS. (f>vXdp)(^ovs is a mistake for <f)povpdp)(^ov<; 
is confirmed by. two MSS. of Eusebius. — €<tto} : apparently for 
k^'&TTOi ; '* let it be open to them," by way of meiosis for " they 
mil have to." Is it possible that we ought to read <.kvy tovtois 
8' eo-Tcu, " let it be their duty " ? — The natural order of the 
following words would be eKacrro) twv Trevre KaTaXe^acrOat 
SioScKa €K Twv v€(ji)V T^? uvTiov (oT avTov) (f>vXrj<;. It must have 
been the unusual order which gave rise to the variants ScoScKaTw 
and 8(o8€KaTov for SioSeKa twv. (F.H.D. would bracket rwv 

7r€VT€.) 

C 2. SLaKXrjpiodrjro) : the Sta- in the verb not only describes 
the original distribution by lot of the twelve fiopia among the 
twelve <f)vXaLj but the subsequent change of distribution described 

669 



760C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

by the words eKacrra iKacTTois Kara fxrjva ; but the subsequent 
changes were decided by a fixed rotation, not by casting lots. In 
other words the KkrjpioOiJTU), in its strict meaning, only applies to 
the first distribution, the Sia- to all the subsequent distributions 
as well. 

C 5. (fipovpoLs T€ KOL ap^ovcTiv '. the usual chiasmus. — I think 
we may conclude that both the sixty cfipovpoi and the five apxovTes 
in each tribe were all called dypovo/xoi. (Cp. 843 d 4 ff., and on 
e 4 below.) 

C 6 ff. oTTws . . . kvkXco : I believe that the difficulties of this 
passage have all arisen from the improper inclusion in the text of 
the words tovs Trj<s x^pas tottovs, which were a marginal inter- 
pretation of Tot fJiepr], made by a commentator who feared that 
Tci jxeprj might be taken to mean the twelve tribes. The intruding 
words were taken to be the object of /xeTaAAarrovra?, and this 
involved either the change of the earlier edd. (and Stallb.) of 
Toi' €^7J<s Toirov to TWf c^rys tottwv, or else the insertion (by Schanz) 
of ei's. The comma which Burnet puts after tottovs restores tov 
roTTOv as the proper obj. of /xeraAAaTTOVTas, and brings the four 
offending words into their proper place — i.e. of apposition to to. 
jxkprj — but, at the same time, reveals them as intruders. — ottws av 
is not temporal — " cum primum " (Ficinus) — but describes the posi- 
tions — or order — from which the " changes to the next lot " are to 
be made ; " auf welche Weise " (Wagner), " quernddmodum" (Stallb.). 

d 1. €7rt Se^ta : Le. following the sun, or, as we should say, 
the "hands of the clock. — ^uAt^ No. I. would spend the twelfth 
month in lot No. XII. and then would begin to retrace its steps, 
beginning with lot XL The following explanation shows that 
Plato knew of some " observers " who faced the South, and con- 
sequently had the East on their left hand. 

d 5. Trpos ry X^po- stands for " besides learning the country." 
— T-^s uypas kKa(Trrj<i (" within the course of each season ") is a 
temporal gen. going with to ytyvo/xevov. 

d 7. /xera/^aAAetv ets roirov means just the same as the 
previous /xeraAAaTTetv tottov. 

e 3. I quite agree with Schanz in rejecting tovs . . • cTri^eAiyTas. 
It is just such an insertion as tovs ttJs x^P^^ tottovs at c 7 — a 
marginal explanation that ay povofMovs kol cf)povpdpxovs was here 
used, as at b 6, of the five head magistrates^ and did not include 
the subordinate sixty (cp. on c 5 above). — It is impossible to suppose 
that the outgoing five are each to choose thirteen successors ; i.e. 
that cTTt/xeAT^Tas is the subject of atpeca-daL. Ficinus's transla- 

570 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 76oe 

tion is : " Tertio autem anno quinque alii agrorum et custodiae 
principes a primatibus trilyiium deligantur ipsoruni duodecini 
curatores." The words in italics are an explanatory addition of 
the translator's own ; his separation of the predicative eTrt/xeAr/ras 
from Tovs irevre makes the best that is to be made of the MS. 
text. — Some later translators take ay p. of the sixty subordinates, 
and </>/). of the head five. Doubtless the sixty were to be renewed 
also, though he thinks it unnecessary to say so. 

e 4. SiaTpL/S-j here means " time of office." It is in the plural 
because they passed separate periods at separate places. As a noun 
containing the notion of a verb, it has the power of governing the 
dat. T(f> TOTTO) €Kd(rTO} (cp. above 631 d 3 and 715 c 7). (It would 
have been awkward to have a second ev in the sentence.) Jowett 
translates, " while on service at each station." 

e 6. Ta(f)p€vovTas : for the construction cp. 759 b 6. 
e 7. ttTTocr/caTTToi/Ta? does not seem to be used of a different 
operation from that described in Ta<f>p€vovTas^ but amplifies the 
notion by adding, in the aTro-, the mention of its purpose. The 
ditches are to serve as impediments to the foe. (Is it possible 
that Toi<fip€vu) may also have meant " raise embankments " ?) — The 
MS. reading €v oiKoSoixi^fxacrLv . . . €LpyovT€<; is naturally inter- 
preted by Jowett "confine in fastnesses (the evil - disposed) " — 
though Ficinus avoided this conclusion by a vague " turribus et 
claustris pro viribus circumductis." But this notion is quite 
foreign to the passage, which — from e 5 to 761 a 3 — is solely 
occupied with precautions against attack by a foreign foe. Also 
such summary imprisonment as these words would describe is not 
likely to have been in the powers of any rural police. Clearly 
Schneider's ^voLKoSofxrjiMao'Lv is the right reading ; evoiKoSo/xeLv is 
used, like the Lat. inaedifieare^ for " to block wp." The noun then 
will mean vxdh built across ravines to block the way. (Ast and 
Stallb. would take ev as denoting the instrument, and oik. to 
mean any structure designed as a fortification. — Herm. proposed 
evoLKoSoix-qixacTLv independently.) 

761 a 2. TiJjv oIk€lii)v . . . eKkeyofxevovSj "avoiding their busy 
times as much as possible " ; lit. " picking out their leisures from 
their own work." The " pregnant " use of leisure for time of leisure 
is like that of e.g. atcrOrja-iv (with rrapex^Lv) in the sense of 
opportunity for seeing. 

a 3. 6€ 67^: summarizing, "and in short." — I unhesitatingly 
adopt Burnet's /xci/ for the MS. ev : (1) €v rots €xOpoi<s is 
nonsense here, as the scribe of saw ; (2) we want a puev for the 

571 



76ia THE LAWS OF PLATO 

following 8e ; (3) after the final /y of ttolciv an /x was likely to 
fall out. As to its position see Burnet, Pref. to vol. v. 

a 6. The rain-water is to be diverted from flooding the crops 
and conducted by artificial channels and dykes into reservoirs. 

b 2. etpyovras is subordinate to eTTLfxeXovfievovs. — Tatfipevfiao-LV : 
not dykes in the sense of embankments, but channels for drawing 
off the water from the reservoirs in the desired directions. 

b 3. KaraSe^^o/xevat Kal irlvovcTaL : the former participle refers 
to the water which remains above ground in the KolXai vdirraL and 
which goes off as vd/jLara or Trora/xot, the latter to the water which 
the ground absorbs and gives off in springs {Kpy^ifat). 

b 5. It is perhaps permissible to wonder whether Plato did not 
write TT/aoieicrat, not Trotovcat here. — Kat, " even." 

b 6. irrfyaLa (vSara) : this adj. is used to denote the clear water 
from spring or lake, as opposed to the turbid storm-torrent (cp. 
above on 736 b). — The language of the whole of this hastily 
written passage (b 6-d 3) more resembles the latter than the former, 

b 6 f . TO, T€ Trrjyala v^ara ktX., " and that, enhancing the 
beauty of the clear water, whether stream or spring, by planta- 
tions and stone structures, and collecting the streams in rock- 
channels, they may ensure abundance, and, by means of artificial 
runnels, should any sacred grove or consecrated enclosure be 
near, may add to their charm by discharging their streams at 
every season of the year into the very interior of the temples of 
the Gods." 

b 7. KO(TixovvT€S : there is a change of subject here, from the 
voLTrat to the rural engineers. 

C 2. d(f)6ova Trdvra seems to have been a common phrase for 
abundance. Cp. Plut. Conv. Disp. iv. 4 (667 c) Kat a-vvovcr tas 

TTOLOVUTat /X€t' dXXrjX(i)V €V dcfidovoLS TrdcTL. — KaO' CKdcTTas ToLs 

copa<s : not " to suit the seasons," " pro singulis anni tempori- 
bus" (Schn.), "je nach den einzelnen Jahreszeiten " (Wagn.), but 
simply " at all seasons " (Jowett) — even the driest. 

c 3. L again alone has the right reading, aAcro?. A, and 
probably 0, had Sacro?, a mistake easily to be accounted for by 
the similarity between A, A and A. — Trepl ravra : i.e. in the neigh- 
bourhood of the TTora/xos or Kpyjvr]. 

C 4. a<^€t/xei/ov MSS. ; as dvir^jjn is often used of the consecration 
of men or animals, Ast, followed by all subsequent editors, except 
Winckelmann and Burnet, rightly altered this to dveifikvov. It 
is possible that Plato used the more out-of-the-way compound 
on purpose. On the other hand, the occurrence of a<^tei/T€s just 

572 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 761 C 

afterwards in its natural sense is in favour of dveifxevovj and 
provides a possible account of the source of ttie error, — Schanz 
rightly rejects the difl&cult ^ in c 4. Cp. below 958 d 4. — I 
accept Stallb.'s and Burnet's punctuation whereby avrd goes closely 
with rd Twv OeCyv upa. 

c 5. Koa-fiwari, : a final revision would scarcely have left this 
word so soon after KocrfiovvTes ; its object is aAtros rj t€/x€V05 
understood. — (The Zurich edd. adopt the reading vSpcia^ of the 
Ven. MS. H, making it the object of Troituaiv, and Madvig would 
insert a re after el in c 3.) — yvjxvdcrLa ktX. : since Ficinus all 
translators (as far as I know), in spite of the natural meaning of the 
particles in c 6, treat the gymnasia and the baths as two separate 
institutions — the former for the young men themselves, the latter for 
their elders. Ficinus, however, follows the literal sense of Plato's 
words, according to which the young men are to make the gym- 
nasia (c 6) " not only for themselves, but for old men as well," 
and they are to do this by adding (not only a frigidarium, which 
all gymnasia would have, but also) a tepidarium. This would 
render the institution a boon to the old and " to the sick and the 
toil-worn." I woiild even insert a comma after ykpova-i to make 
this plain. 

C 7. Vat. 1029 (Bekker's Y) omits Oepfxd, and Naber would 
reject it — rightly, I think. The mention of the supply of fire- 
wood is enough by itself to show that hot baths are meant. The 
expression yepovTiKa Xovrpd is quoted by Pollux, Onom. ii. 13, p. 
158. — With the use of the adj. Stallb. cps. that of ^eviKd with 
OepaTrevfxara at 718 a 7, and with dfiapTi^/jiaTa at 730 a 4, 

d 1. It is hard to piece together these disjointed jottings. 
ctt' ovT^aeL (" with a view to their amendment ") seems to go closely 
with 8€Xoix€vov<s ev/xevwsj and t€ . . . Kat to connect Ka/xvovToyv 
vocrots (croj/xara) and rerpvp^eva Trdvots crisypaTa. 

d 3. 8k^iv : Winckelmann has undoubtedly recovered the 
original word for us in changing the MS. S' e^iv to Sc^iv. Its 
construction is that of a "cognate" ace. with Se^^o/xevovs — as at 
Eur. I. A. 1182 Se^op-eda Se^cv r^v ere Se^acrdat )(^pe(x>v. As to 
larpov, perhaps it is best, with Stallb., to take it as " nota brevilo- 
quentia dictum pro rj 8e^iv larpov pr) irdvv (T6(fiov" Another 
possibility is to take larpov p.. it. cr. to stand " pregnantly " for 
" than treatment by a poor physician." Ficinus translates : " quae 
sane curatio longe melior est quam medici parum periti medela." 
We should say : " a visit to the bath is much more efficacious than 
a visit to a poor physician." 

573 



76ld THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 5. /xera TratStas ovSa/xfj ayaplrov : a pregnant use of the 
preposition ; " and will provide the means of delightful recrea- 
tion." — The connexion of ideas between TratSia and ctttovSt^ seems 
to be this : " The aypovojxoi have to provide recreation for them- 
selves and others — but they have also work to do which is no 
play ; they have to risk their lives in our defence." 

d 6. TTCyot ravTa is quite general : " (the serious part) of their 
business." — tovs ^^rJKovra : the sixty young subordinates from 
each tribe. 

d 8. yeLTovwv refers, I think, to neighbouring foreigners, so 
that aAAos aA.Aov in the following line does not apply to them, 
but only to the natives — tiov aAAwv ttoXltwv ; if this is so, 
yecroviov is short for y^v Tt? yetTovwv dSiKrj. 

e 2. avTovs, " by themselves." 

e 3. ficTOL TU}v 8(o8eKa, " cum duodenis " (Schneider) ; cp. below 
762 e 9. This must mean that each of the five (jipovpapyoi of the 
tribe associated his twelve young subordinates with him to form 
the tribunal ; its numbers would then be sixty-five. The follow- 
ing Tov<i eTTTaKaiScKa is doubtless rightly rejected by Hug as a 
hasty comment of someone who simply added together twelve and 
five. There is nothing to make us think that only one lot of twelve 
was thus associated with the five (^povpapypt. The twv with 
5w8€/<a implies that the number had been mentioned before. 
This was only done at 760 b 7, and no subsequent mention has 
been made of any 'particular twelve. 

e 5. StKa^eiv /cat ap\€iv : the arrangement is remarkable, 
because it is not chiastic. 

e 6. TrXr^v . . . /SacTikeoyVj " except those quasi - regal judges 
whose judgement is final." For rekos cTrtri^evat in this sense cf, 
below, 767 a 4, and 768 b 6 (re Acs Kpivetv), 957 b 4. 

e 7. The ace. tovs dypov6p.ovs has nothing to govern it. He 
starts as if ovctSia-reov or Setv oveLSt^eiv were to follow, and ends 
with oveiSrj <f)€p€(rOa)(rav as if a nom. had preceded. 

762 a 1. Xap/SdveLv kol (f>€p€LV : a variety of dyetv Kal <j>kp€LV. 
At Rex). 574 a 3 (f>kpeLv is used alone in this sense. — tQ>v (partitive) 
is, I think, neut., and refers to the viro^vyta and oiKcrat mentioned 
at 760 e 9. Already there it was intimated that the " commandeer- 
ing " was not to be quite arbitrary. 

a 2. eav . . . 8t8oi/T(ov, " if they accept a present offered with 
corrupt motives." Plato's custom is to put irapd with the gen. of 
the person from whom a thing is received, but here it would be 
inconvenient to put in irapd, so he takes advantage of the fact 

574 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 762 a 

that the person is expressed by a participle, which might count as 
a gen. abs., and leaves it out. 

a 3. 7) [Kttt SiKas] aStKcos Siave/xwcrt : the fact that gives r^ 
aStKCDS as a variant for dStKcos, suggests that there was a MS. read- 
ing which rejected Kal ScKas, and supplied t6 from a 2 with Sia- 
V€fjni)(rL. This I believe to be the true reading : SLave/xeLv is the 
natural counterpart of Se^^eo-^at, but 8iKas Siavefxetv is not a natural 
expression at all. — rals [xev ^(OTrctats vttcikovtcs, " if they fall 
victims to corruption." 

a 4. ovetSr] cf)€p€cr6(i)(rav : probably this degradation would 
involve disqualification as magistrates. Their names would be 
removed from the rolls. 

a 6. For the "neighbours'" courts see below 766 e 3 ff.aud 956 c2. 

a 7. €k6vt€<s is contrasted with the following lav fxrj 'dkXdxriv 
{virkx^Lv). The smaller suits can only be settled by the rural 
tribunal with the defendant's consent. 

b 1. Tw /xiOiCTTacrdat . . . ct? 'irepov tottoi/ is not governed by 
TTto-Tevovres, but is dative of instrument with a7ro<fiev^€L(T0aL. 

b 2. cf)€vyovT€s : as Ast says, this is a pun ; " while they are 
defendants in the suit " is what the word means technically — as we 
might say, " hoping that as defendants they may defend themselves 
successfully." 

b 3. A alone gives totjto) '7r€ptXay)(^dv€iv for tovtcov irkpi A., 
and it is uncorrected. — Xay\<xv€Lv, " must proceed " ; infinitives 
alternate with imperatives in much the same sense. 

b4. I agree with Burnet that L (again) with A^ and 0^ 
preserves in 8tKais the right reading, and that A and 0, and the 
edd. who follow them (Herm., Ziirr., Wagner, and Schanz) go 
wrong in reading SUas. StKas or SiKrjv may easily have been 
left out by the author after Aay^ai/etv here — in spite of the fact 
that A. is not used elsewhere without SiK-qv in this sense in Plato 
— seeing that ev rai? . . . StKats follows. — The Kowal SiKaL were 
presumably the city courts. 

b 6. Ttt 8vo €T7], ''during their two years (of office)." 

b 7. KaO' cKao-Tovs tovs tottovs : this leaves it vague whether there 
was one "mess" for each local division, or more than one. It is 
conceivable that each of the five leaders, with his twelve subordinates, 
formed a separate mess, but, as twi/ dp\6vTii)Vy and not tov dp-^ov- 
Tos, are spoken of, in the next line but one, as having power to 
dispense with attendance, or make other arrangements, it is more 
probable that the sixty-five messed together. 

C 4. kdv d7ro<f>'qviocrLv avroi/, " if they take cognizance of his 

575 



762 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

offence " ; aTro^atveti/ is used as " to name " is used as a technical 
term in the House of Commons. The following words describe 
the process by which this is done. It is implied that the five 
might overlook an offence in one of the sixty, though, as we see 
below, the juniors were to show the seniors no mercy. (Ficinus 
translates aTro^T^vaxrtv by damnent.) 

C 5. " And post him in the Agora as a deserter." 

C 6. TO eavrov fxepos, " quantum in se sit " (Fie). 

d 1. aTLfKDprJTOis qualifies KoAa^co-^w, not KoXd^etv. — If Plato 
meant both the avrojv of the MSS. and avros to stand — which is 
doubtful — his object was to emphasize the fact that in the case of 
the apxovres there was no one whose orders or permission could 
excuse absence ; avros would then be " on his own authority, 
ultro." — Probably avT<x>v is a mistake for av. 

d 2. There is a delicate /xeiwcrts about eTrt/xeAeicr^at, ''attend to." 

d 4. (fJLrj) cTre^Lwv is subordinate to the preceding participles : 
" he who notices or hears of it without indicting the offender.^' 

d 5. Trepl ktX. : a striking instance of an explanatory asyndeton. 
It tells us what " the severer (TrAetovi) penalty " was. 

d 6. rjTLp.dcr6(j) MSS. Schanz is very likely right in substituting 
for this the more technical rjTLfxioo-Oo) (cp. Rep. 553 b vtto crvKocfiav- 
Twv 1^ aTToOavovra rj eKTrecrovTa yj dr ljjlioO €VTa). The ofl'ender is 
to be disqualified from ever again holding ofiice over any of the young 
dypovo/jiOL — TovTOJV : neuter; "the vop,o<f)vXaK€s mustpay strict 
attention to such lapses. If they can't prevent them, they must 
at least be sure that they are duly punished." Then follows a 
most valuable little TrpooLfxtov on the philosophy of authority and 
government in general. The asyndeton makes it the more im- 
pressive. (Stobaeus's Se, which Ast adopts, is a natural error.) 
" Believe me — I wish everybody would believe me — that there is 
not a man living who will ever make a good master without being 
a servant first ; and no success as a ruler can bring a man so much 
honour and credit as loyal service, first of all to the laws, — for 
therein he serves the gods — and next, while he is young, to all 
elders and superiors." 

e 5. ws ravTTjv TOLS BeoLS ovcrav SovXetav : this construction 
is here felt to be an expansion of the simple SovAttav used as the 
"ace. of the inner object" with SovXeveuv ; ws with a noun and 
participle in the ace. can, however, by itself be used in the sense 
of " under the idea that." So at Phaedo 109 d ws . . . ra den pa 
\iiipovvray and Rep. 345 e dAAol pio-Oov alrovcnv w? ov\i avToicriv 
tu</)€Atav k(Top,kvriv €k tov dp^eiv aAAol tois apxo/xevoLS. — For the 

576 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 7620 

dat. Tois Scots', depending directly on the noun SovXeiav, cp. above 
on 760 e 4. For the statement itself cp. on 715 c 4 ff. 

e 6. KOL €VTL/xo)>s fSefSiiDKoo-i '. as Wordsworth says, " we live 
by admiration." The veneration felt by the young " squire " for 
the distinguished veteran who commands him is half his training. 
— Burnet preserves the letters of the MS. CTretTa et in writing 
€Tr€LT del ; Stobaeus has hretra act, and so Schanz. All edd. 
before Schanz print eireira alone. 

e 7. Schanz would follow Ast in rejecting rovs v€ov<s, but 
though unnecessary it comes in quite naturally as the (super- 
fluous) correlative of tol<s tt peer fSvre pots. 

e 8. The MS. reading diropov, if right, means " poverty- 
stricken," " scanty," " penurious " ; at 680 d 8 we had dTropta in 
the sense of dearth. But, though I do not think diropov im- 
possible here, I believe 0. Apelt (p. 11) is right in reading dirvpov 
for it. Plutarch {Bellone an pace etc. ch. vi. p. 349 a) uses dirvpa 
(TiTia of the meagre fare of soldiers on a campaign, as contrasted 
with the rich diet allowed to a chorus in training. This meaning 
exactly suits our present passage. — For yeyev/xevov etvat as a 
substitute for yeyevcrdat cp. /5Ae7rov(ras elvai at 631 d 3, and 
/SkeTrovr' eivai at 963 a 3, for /?A.67r€iv. — For tov twv dypovofiwv 
yeyovdra cp. on 754 d 4. 

e 9. 01 SwSeKa : i.e. the five lots of twelve each — " duodeni " 
(Schneider) ; the same who are called tovs e^-qKovTa at d 3 above. 
(Cp. on 761 e 3.) 

e 10. f^ovXevkcrOfjicrav ws . . . ov\ e^ovcrtv, " they must reckon 
on not having." 

7633' 1- olovirep^ like olov at Charm. 153 a 2, and ota at Gritias 
113 e 3, is utpote — "cum famuli sint " (Schneider). 

a 2. €K is lit. " from among " — " and they must not (seek aid) 
from the neighbouring farmers and villagers, and use their 
slaves, etc." 

a 4. oaa €19 TO. B-qfxoata stands for eirl rocravTa ocra ets ra 
SrjfiocTLd kcrriv {vTrr^perrnxara). — ra 8' aAAa : other iWT^/Jtrry/zara, 
that is, than those done for the sake of the public. To mark 
this I have changed the colon before rd to a comma. aAAa is 
governed by ^taKovovvTk^ t. k. S. 

a 6. I have ventured to bracket kavrol'^. There is nothing in 
it which has not already been expressed by avrol 8l aurwv. For 
the collocation of act. and pass. cp. 697 d 6 /xl(tovvt€<s fxicrovvTaL. 
I have also marked the fact that SLe^epevviofxevoL brings a change 
of subject matter by putting a dash instead of a comma before irpos. 
VOL. I 577 2 p 



763 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

b 2. ovSevos cXttTTov, " as important as any " ; he is, doubt- 
less, not thinking here of the educational value of the study — 
as he was in his panegyric of mathematics at 747 b — but only 
of the value of the information itself. 

b 5. aXXr]s, " attendant " ; we must supply x^-P'-^ from b 3, 
with the genitives. 

b 7 f . etVe Tfcs . . . rovTO Trpoo-ayopevojv, " while calling them np. 
or ay., or whatever he likes " ; i.e. " under whatever name he prefers, 
let each man do his best to protect his country." With tovto 
irpocrayopevoiv (" calling them by that name ") Stallb. cps. Symp. 

212 c TOVTOV OVV TOV XoyOV . . . OTt Kttt OTTTj ^tttpcts oi^o/jta^wv, 

TOUTO ovo/xa{'€. (Though eTTiTrjSeverio governs to iTnTrjSevfxa, 
supplied from b 6, Ast is wrong in saying that tovto refers to 
eTrtTrjSivfJia.) As the Spartan KpvTrreta, mentioned above at 
633 b 9, was a similar kind of service to that of the dypovo/xot, 
it is natural to refer to it here. As the exhortation seems to be 
specially addressed to the rank and file of the aypovofxoi, it is not 
likely that, as Orelli suggests, Timaeus's (and Photius's) linraypeTas 
ought to be substituted for Kpvn-Tovs, for that word is said (by 
Tim.) to be the title of a (probably) high oflQcial. 

C 3. TO Se /x€Ta TOVTO . . . rjv eTToyuevov, " next in our 
election of magistrates came that of the Agoranomoi and Asty- 
nomoi." alpecreois depends on fxeTo, toiJto ; cp. Symp. 217 e 1 
fJL€Xpi Sevpo TOV Adyov, and similar genitives with evTavda. 
dyopavojxMv Trept and oo-t. Tvcpu are periphrases for the simple 
gen. (cp. above on 685 c 2), so that to dyopavopnav Trept stands for 
TO Twv dyo/)avd/x(ov, and is the subj. to -^v €7r6/jL€vov. (Possibly 
the TO was, by a slovenly conversational laxity of construction, 
allowed to do double duty : (1) to form the adverbial to /xeTct 
TOVTO, and (2) to go, as above explained, with dyopavo/xojv irkpi.) 
— As to the reading, I believe Burnet's is the right solution of 
the difficulty. All other MSS. but A, and all the printed edd. 
have da-TvvvjUsiv rjv rj/xLV cTro/xei^ov, but in A rjv is in an erasure 
which is too big for it. In the margin stands Tpeiv (" cum vitii 
nota," Schanz). Burnet naturally supposes that Tpetv originally 
stood in A where now t^v stands, and further conjectures that it 
was a clumsy scribe's version of an indistinctly written Trepi ^v. 
— The rjv refers to 760 b 1. 

c 5. Bekker substituted ye for the MS. tc, which is certainly 
wrong ; Ast would simply reject it. We may conjecture that 
the insertion of ye after dypovofxois improved the rhythm of the 
sentence ; it is hard to see how it improved its meaning. — It is 

578 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 763 c 

strange that the three aa-rvvofMOL should be said to correspond in 
function to the sixty subordinate aypovofxoi of each tribe, rather 
than to the five (f>povpap^oL. They, like the five, were electedy 
while the sixty were selected by their superiors. We are not 
told that they had any subordinates, nor what was the length of 
their period of office. We may conclude from 760 a 6 f. that the 
military officials undertook the defence of the city ; so that the 
da-Tvvofxoi would be relieved of the military part of the duties of 
the dypovo/jiOL. 

C 7. eTrificXovficvoL is subordinate to fXLfxovfxevoL. It explains 
wherein the resemblance lies. — tojv Kara rh da-rv : i.e. those main 
and cross streets which lay wholly within the city, while those 
next mentioned are the " extensions " (rera/xei/wi^) within the 
city of the main thoroughfares converging from different parts 
of the country. 

d 1. Kara v6p.ov<5 : the city was not to be allowed to build 
itself anyhow. 

d 3. TedepaTrevfJieva : the same care which the dypovofioL 
(01 (f>povpovvT€<i) bestowed on the quality and conduct of the water 
outside the city walls, will be expected from the oo-rvvo/xot within 
the city. 

d 4. Kocrpy : cp. above 761c 5 Koa-pioa-Ly of the decorative 
effect of fountains and streams and pools. — /cat tovtovs : a 
reference to the importance of the office of dypovopoL, implied 
above in c 1 f . 

d 5. Svvarovs : not, I think, as Ast, Schneider, and Wagner 
(and F.H.D.), divites, proceres, but, as Jowett, " men of ability." 
It does not follow that because, as e.g. at Thucyd. viii. 21, ol 
SvvaroL could be used to denote "the rich," ''the upper class," 
Swaros by itself could mean " rich." As is explained by Plato 
at Prot. 351 a 1 ff., a man becomes Swaros partly by training; 
the requisite training, and the " leisure " would be more likely 
to be found in men of the highest class, hence the 8l6 in d 6. 
Besides, the Kat before tovtovs would then mean that the 
(^povpapyoL were to come from the highest class. Fie. does not 
take 8i>vaTovs absolutely, but joins it, like cryoXd^ovra^, with 
cTTt/xeAeto-^ai, and he is very likely right. 

d 6. A comparison of e 4 f . shows that the plur. np-qpara is 
here used (as at 756 c 3 and 760 a 1) as a variant for the singular 
— and shows also that it is the dcrrvvopoL, and not their proposers, 
who are to come exclusively from the highest property class. — 
TttS avyp = o fSovXopevos. 

579 



763 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 7 f . 8ia)(^eipoTov7j6evT(j}v . . . yiyviDUTai, "when a show of 
hands has decided between the candidates, and you have found 
the six who have most votes." I think Siaxeip. is gen. abs. 
with the subj. left out, and that Kai is explanatory — i.e. intro- 
duces a more detailed account of the same process described by 
Siaxetp. The subj. to d(f)LKOfM€V(i)v is the antecedent to ots., 
Where the Greek says when those who have most votes 
(X^LpoTovtat has to be supplied with TrAeia-rat) " come to six" 
we should say " when you come to the six, etc." In both cases 
the coming is metaphorical. (It would spoil the sentence to put 
in KpLCTLV, with Heindorf, or — rather better — e^eraa-cv with 
Winckelmann, after ets.) 

e 2. ots TovTiDv cTTt/xeAe? : probably, as Ritter says, the 
Trpvravet?. R. cps. 758 d 2 ff. and 755 e 4. 

e 3. Here again, in avrols L alone among our MSS. preserves 
the right reading ; A and O have avrovs. 

e 6 ff . ScKa . . . aTTocfiyjvaL : Aldus's insertion of €k before 
Ttov aAA-cov, adopted by all editors, leaves the main difficulty 
of this passage untouched. After the preceding words no descrip- 
tion of the process of the election of the Agoranomoi is needed ; 
if given, it should repeat the substance of d 7 ff . ^tax^iporovr^Okv- 
T(uv . . . €7rifxeX.€S. But our text, in reading xetporoi/i^^evTas, 
introduces an unheard-of novelty. It makes the elected ten 
themselves select by lot five from among their number, and 
proclaim their appointment. Ficinus has : " quippe de decern qui 
ceteros suffragio superarint quinque sorte designentur, et com- 
probati magistratus declarentur." This suggests a reading ScKa 
Twv aXXoiv Trpox^i'POTovrjdkvTiDV (or TrpoKpuOevTOJv). The view 
that aAAwv is governed by a word denoting preference is sup- 
ported by the reading of L and (which is also that of A^) rj 
TO)v ttAAwv. This variant I take to be due to a marginal rj ol 
aXX.oi, intended to explain tcjv aAAwv. I think the best course 
here is to bracket Se^a . . . aTro^rJvat ; the next best merely to 
read Se/ca twv aAAwv Trpox^ipoTovqOkvToyv, in either case rejecting 
Aldus's €K. 

e 8. x^^P^'^^^^^'^^ ^^ '^^'^ TTOLvra : these words are difficult. 
If we apply them to the election of the Agoranomoi they intro- 
duce a further contradiction of ytyv. rrjv aipecnv KaOdirep rj rwv 
acTTwo/xwv. Besides, what can be the result of an election where 
" every voter votes for every candidate " ? The only way out of 
this difficulty is to suppose that every member of the voting 
assembly was bound, under penalty, to lift up his hand either for 

580 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 7636 

or against each of the TrpofSaXkofxevoi. But we have no other 
reason to assume that there was any such process as voting against 
a candidate. I therefore think the words mean that every 
member of the voting assembly is to vote at the election of every 
official ; i.e. whether it be for Agronomoi, or Astynomoi, or 
Agoranomoi. It will be observed that the risk of having to pay 
the large fine of fifty drachmas need not be run by any member 
of the two lower classes, for he may absent himself from the 
assembly with impunity (764 a 3 ff.). (Ficinus translates Trdvra 
by quemlibet. Jowett takes iravra to be " all the ten.'^ Ritter 
mentions — to reject it — the possibility that the following 6 firj 
'OcXmv means "the (elected candidate) who refuses to serve.") 

764213. ets kKKX-qcriav kol rov koivov a-vXXoyov : this seems 
to be a general direction applying to deliberative as well as voting 
assemblies ; and this gives some support to the assumption just 
made that the x^'-P- ^^^ Trdvra was of general application, and did 
not refer to one election alone. 

a 7. TL may perhaps have arisen from dittography of the follow- 
ing TT, and Schanz rejects it. If genuine, it is an adverbial ace. 
of inner object — " unless the magistrates issue some sort of order." 

b 1. Tovs Se 8r) dyopai/ofjLovSy "to go back to the Agoranomoi." 
8k 6ry recognizes that there has been a digression. 

b 7. avTOTJs, " by themselves," as at c 3 below. 

C 6. €KaT€p(i}v depends, I think, not on dp\ovras (" of each of 
the two subjects "), but on Strrovs (" two sets of each kind of 
official ") ; there would thus be four kinds altogether. 

C 7. avTwi/, if correct, must mean "in the subjects" ; i.e. music 
and gymnastic, avrrjs, which is the reading of L and which 
Ed. Lev. and Steph. print, seems to mean " (0/ education) jproper,^^ 
as distinguished from the public contests which tested it. It 
would be interesting to know where avrwv came from ; its only 
warrant to us is Cod. Voss., a late hand in A, and a somewhat 
earlier one in 0. I believe L again is right. For tliis use of 
avTTJs cf. b 7 and c 3. [F.H.D. prefers avrwv as the more difficult 
reading.] — The fact that TratSetas . . . aywi/tcrTtKTj? was omitted 
both in and in A is prima facie evidence that one of the two 
MSS. was copied from the other. But (1) they may both have 
been copied from the same original, or (2) from MSS. which 
shared the omission, or (3) the omission, of which the cause is 
patent, might have been made independently by the scribes of 
both. — With the second TratScta?, as with dywi/ta? in d 3, we ought, 
I think, to supply dpxpvTa<^ from the preceding sentence. 

581 



764 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 8 ff. yvfxvacTLoyv Kat StSao-KaAetwi/ iTTLfxeX-qTas : these words 
count as a titular designation, and Koa-fiov . . . Kopwv are loosely- 
tacked on to part of it, i.e. to eTrt/xeAy^Tas : " by superintendents 
of education tlie Law means overseers of gymnasia and schools, to 
look after both their outward seemliness and the instruction given 
in them, and the regulation of these matters, and to regulate the 
attendance and residence of boys and girls." (Stallb. would 
make yu/xv. and SiSaa-K. depend on the genitives which depend on 
iTTLfjieXyjTds.) — Stephanus's correction of the MS. ScSaa-KaXiiov 
to SiSaa-KaXeLiDv (cp. 804 c 3) is supported by the reading 
SiSaa-KaXLoyv in Vat. 1029. 

d 1. Koa-fxov is used, I think, of the dignity and beauty of the 
buildings and other surroundings of the places of education. It 
will be remembered that at Rep. 401 bfF. Plato attaches great 
importance to the beauty of the surroundings in which a child 
learns. (F.H.D. j^refers arrangement, Jowett " order.") 

d 2. oiKqcreiiiv : not, I think, as Jowett, " lodging," i.e. home 
accommodation ; this would hardly fall within the sphere of the 
Education Authority. Its connexion with (f)OLTy]cr€0)v suggests 
that it means that the education official should assign pupils to the 
several schools according to residence — should see, in other words, 
that each child went to the school nearest its home, and that 
there was a school within easy reach of every home. Hermann's 
a(TKrjcr€(i)v which Schanz adopts, denotes a part of the subject 
which has been already mentioned — i.e. the TratSevo-ts itself — and 
does not come well in connexion with " the going to and from 
school." 

d 3. dyoivtas : both A and first wrote aywvas here. Such 
a mistake could hardly be made independently. It seems to have 
been corrected early in both MSS., and probably existed in the 
MS. or MSS. from which they were copied. — This branch of the 
/xova-LKTJs Kat yvfivacTTLKrjs dp)(^ovTes might incidentally serve as 
"examiners" of the schools and superintendents of their public 
displays, but their main duty was with adults. The word dyatvia 
is here used generally of all public contests, though at d 5 (if the 
reading is correct) it is used, as at Meno 94 b, of gymnastic contests 
only. On the other hand ddXrjTais in d 4 is rather unusually 
applied to competitors in " musical " dywves as well as to those 
in gymnastic Contests. 

d 5. Stallbaum suggested that we ought to read aywi/as for 
aywv/i'av here. The suggestion gets some little support from the 
mistaken aywvas at d 3, but still leaves the sharp contrast between 

582 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 764 d 

the restricted meaning of dyiovtav in d 5 and the general meaning 
of dyuivias in d 3. I am more inclined to bracket inpl /x. . . . 
(xAAoiN as a (quite unnecessary) marginal comment. The words 
add nothing to what was said at d 3 f. cv re . . . ddXrjTais. 

d 6. dvOpioTTUiv re kol iTnrojv : Ast notices that Plutarch 
{Symp. Probl. ii. 5, 639 f) remarks that tlie horse is the only 
animal which can share with man the distinction won in athletic 
contests, because he alone shares in the discipline and danger of 
the soldier. (Plutarch is arguing that the true significance of all 
games is that they are /xiytxry/xara twv TroAe/xtKwi/.) 

d 7. Tov<; Trepl fxovioSlav re Kal /xi/xr^riK^/i^, "artists who 
perform by themselves " ; fMovioBcav is the emphatic word. ' 

Dramatic representations are not mentioned ; probably because, 
for reasons given in the Republic, they were to be prohibited. 

e 2. The loose style of this classification, and its minuteness, 
are characteristic of the Laws. The author's first object is not to 
settle precisely the divisions of fiova-LKi] or yi'/xvao-rtKi^, but to 
give a general indication of the duties of the "Ministry of 
Education." Hence he resumes what he had begun to say at d 7 
by an unnecessary repetition of erepovs. At first sight Stallbaum's 
rejection of this second erepovs — he thinks it was a gloss on 
aAAovs — seems to regularize the sentence completely ; but then it 
is discovered that pai/'wSwv, and the four other genitives with it, 
are left rather awkwardly stranded, because we are then obliged 
to take dOXodkras (as a secondary pred.) with tous avTov<i in d 6 
as well as with krepovi in d 7, whereas with the second krkpovs 
the informal " resumption " serves to show what had been left out 
in the previous expression, without putting it all into grammatical 
order. 

e 3. The arrangement of subjects is chiastic as usual. 

e 4 f . Trai^idv : we have no word for this display of a delighted 
and delightful activity, in which the delight is heightened by the 
restraints imposed by the artistic sense. With us a game implies 
skill, and therefore practice and training, but not necessarily that 
satisfaction of the artistic instincts which was associated with the 
Greek TratSta as here used. — iv 6p)(i^(re(rL . . . fxova-iKrj : I follow 
Ficinus in taking this prepositional adjunct to be a qualification 
of TratStav ; this would be made quite clear if, as I think we 
ought, we read ycyvofjikvqv for the hardly constraable yiyvop,kvrj 
in e 5. (Wagner and Jowett take the words with dp)(^ovTas.) 
Fie. has '* Primum igitur in chori ludo, ubi viri pueri et puellae 
tripudio ceterisque musicae modis exercentur, principes eligendi." 

583 



764 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

— Ttt^ts is " system," " systematic arrangement," what we should 
call the rules of the Musician's art, not merely (as Wagner and 
Jowett) the ordering and arrangement of the performance by the 
• ap)(^ovT€S. (Reading yiyvo/jL€vr]v), we may translate: "as dis- 

played in dancing and the whole round of artistic manifestation." 
— Tov<s a.p\ovTas : the plural is quite general, " the authority." 
It is necessary to use the plural as long as the number is not 
definitely ascertained, even though it may turn out to be only one. 
e 6. The mistake of tKavws for uKavos must have been an early 
one ; A L and all three have it ; only A corrected it. Schanz 
believes that A had LKavos to begin with, though he admits some 
disturbance in the MS. at the syllable -bs. (Possibly the text once 
was LKavios Se e;^€i.) 

765212. yj : at 721 b 1 eVetSav €T(ov y Tt? rptaKOVTa shows 
that rpiaKovra yeyovws erwi/ would be good Greek. There is 
therefore no necessity with Ast (and Schanz) to reject the ry here. 
— eiVaycoyevs : this title denotes the ofl&cial as the man to whom 
all intending competitors must apply ; who would certify their 
right to compete, and assign them their order (cp. Siaderrjpa 
below), as well as decide the result {tyji' SiaKpuTiv StBovaL). 

a 4. It would have seemed simpler to us if he had said etcray w- 
yevs T€ eivai kol . . . dTroSiSovai ; as it is we must take t€ kul as 
coupling elcray. and aTroStSovs, and take eivaL with them both, — 
SiaOerrjpa : this title cannot be supposed to imply any placing of 
the members of the chorus in a proper position — that duty would 
fall to the Choragus. 

a 5. oVot /JL€v cf)LXocf)p6vii)s ia-\rjKaxTL Trepl to. roiavra, " quicum- 
que haec studia adamarunt " (Schneider) ; i.e. " devote themselves 
to the subject." Ficinus has " qui huic rei vacant." Is it possible 
that he read crxoXd^ova-Ly and that our (f>L\o(f)p6v(j)<s €(T\rjKa(TL was 
originally a marginal interpretation of it ? At b 1 these musical 
devotees are called ol ifxTretpoi. 

a 8. KOL Trjv 7rpo/3oXrjv 8rj tov alpovfievov ck tiov ifxTreiptxiv 
TTOL-qreoVj " in proposing a name too, the elector must take one 
from the class of musicians." 

b 1. eV T€ . . . aTretpos 6 Aaxwv : I think the dictionaries are 
wrong in assigning to KaTrjyoprj/xa here the meaning objection, and 
to oLTrrjyoprjixa the meaning " defence." Karr^yopecv is used by Plato 
in the sense of assert, declare, while the force of d-n-- is constantly 
that of rejection. The author's decided fondness for chiasmus too 
is an argument on the same side, twv fxev are the challengers, 
Twv Se the defenders. Ficinus has : " una haec approbatio repro- 

584 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 765 b 

batioque habeatur " (though he alters the order of the subsequent 
clause because the chiasmus does not suit the Latin idiom). 

b 4. The sole result aimed at by the SoKLfxaa-ta is to get the 
best musician of the ten selected candidates. I would therefore, 
retaining Stephanus's comma, which Burnet has reinserted after 
SoKi/zao-^et's, reject (Ast's) comma before it. In ^.a-xy SoKijxao-Oeis 
the participle is as significant as ^o-XVi ^^^ ^^^ words mean 
" succeeds in passing the examination and (so) gets the appointment." 
Otherwise 09 av Aa^?/ is a lame repetition of the information 
conveyed by 6 Xaxw^' in b 3. (Heindorf thinks ruiv has fallen out 
l)efore SfKa ; on the other hand Hermann, at c 6 below, would 
remove the twv which the text has there. If either change be 
thought necessary, I should prefer Hermann's. — F.H.D. thinks 
8oKLiJ.acr$€L<5 a gloss.) 

b 5. Kara Tavra Sk . . . 6 Xa^^v rrjv Kplcriv : two controversies 
divide interpreters of this passage. (1) In the first place it is 
disputed whether (a) dpx^TO) governs /xovojScojv re Kal crvi'avAiwi/ — 
as it does the corresponding twv x°P^^ i^ ^^^ preceding sentence ; 
or whether (6) /jlov. and crvvavkLuiv depend on the preceding 
KpLiTiv — in otlier words whether tojv dcfytKo/xeviov ets Kpia-iv refers 
(a) to the candidates who are " examined " for the office of apx'^v 
or a$\oO€Tr]s /xovwStwv, or (6) to the cowpetitors in musical aywves. 
Ficinus, Ast,and Stallbaum take the former view; Wagner, Schneider, 
and Ritter the latter. The previous twv x^/owv dpx^TO), the 
importance attached in the case of the corresponding election to 
the SoKLfxaa-LOL, the Kpicnv in d 1, the tense of ac^tKo/xtvwv and the 
number of p-ov. and crwavAiwv are all arguments in favour of (a). 
The main reasons against (a) are that the final words €is . . . 
6 Xax^v TTjv Kpia-iv are tautological and somewhat otiose ; also the 
position of rov evtavrov eKilvov is peculiar, and the meaning of 
Aa;(cuv strained. Whichever view be taken, no great harm is done 
to the general tenor of the passage. — But (2) those who in the 
second controversy hold, with Stallbaum, Susemihl and Jowett, 
that €is Tovs KpiTas a7ro8t8ovs . . . tt^v KpicTLv means that the dOXo- 
dkrrj's p.ovio8l<jjv is not to decide between competitors, but to refer 
the decision to another body, stultify the whole description of these 
elections. The one most important function of all these Presidents 
is undoubtedly to judge at the contests (see e.g. 765 a 3). The 
term dOXoOkm^'^ itself proves it. Wagner gets out of the difficulty 
by rejecting et's tovs ... 6 Xax^v ttjv Kpia-LV, and Schanz follows 
him. Ficinus, Ast, Schneider, Wagner, and Ritter refer the words, 
as undoubtedly they ought to be referred, to the SoKt/iacrLa to be 

685 



765 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

passed by each of tlie ten selected candidates, and as such, though 
somewhat tautological, they are, considering the importance attached 
to the 8oKLfjLa<TLa, not out of place. — We may infer that ol Kpira't 
were the special body of musical experts chosen (by the vo/xo^TjAaK€s 
— see above a 7) to conduct the SoKi/xatrta. We may translate : 
" that man among the candidates for examination who is appointed 
{Xa\(iiv) by proceedings just like these, for that year, shall be 
president of solo-performances and concerted pieces ; and each 
man " (of the ten) " drawn by lot must " (as described in connexion 
with the previous election) " submit to the decision of the jury (of 
musicians)." — (Ast, followed by Stallb., may be right in thinking 
6 Xa^iav in c 1 an explanatory comment. If so, it is a correct 
comment. It is almost " (each of the ten) when his turn comes" 

b 7. (TuvauAta : probably a piece of music in the performance of 
which the flute alternated with the lyre. See Athenaeus 6 1 7 f. and 
618 a, and the commentators on Hor. Odes iv. 1. 22, and Epod. 
9. 5. (Some think that the two instruments sounded together.) 

C 3. €K TiOV rpiTiOV T€ Kol €TL TWV 8€VT€p(i)V Tt/XT^/XaTWV : the 

musical and literary critics might apparently belong to any property 
class, even the highest. (Nowadays these would mostly come from 
the two middle classes, while the best judges of horseflesh or 
athletics would belong either to the richest class, or to the poorest.) 

c 5. It is hard to see how the Kai arose, which A, L and have 
after T/otcrtv. No printed edition has it, I think. A^'s substitu- 
tion of rptcrt for rptcrlv Kal seems to suggest that Kal arose from 
a misreading of v. 

C 6. Aaxeiv is here used, as at b 4 and b 6, in the sense of " to be 
definitely appointed." 

C 8. Twv SoKLfia^ovTiov : i.e. a jury of experts — corresponding 
to the KptTOLS of c 1. The word \f/T)(^os suggests that there might 
be differences of opinion among the jury, and that a majority 
carried the day. 

d 1. oipxv^ Xrj^Lv Kal KptcTiv : a hendiadys ; almost " appoint- 
ment to an office by examination." The two processes are closely 
connected, as in the words Xaxy SoKiiiacrdeLs at b 4. The KaO 
rjvTLvaovv seems to make the application general to all the kinds 
of official whose election has been mentioned since 764 d 5. These 
final words are meant to emphasize the importance of the 
SoKifiacTLa. 

d 4. Trepl TO, 7rpo€Lp7]iJL€va = twv Trpo€Lp7]fi€vii)V, i.e. jJLOV(riKrj<s Kai 
yvfxvacTTLKrjs (764 c 5). 

d 7. For the VJ cp. above on a 2. — The age limit is established 

586 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 765 d 

independently by the fact that this official was to be chosen from 
among the vo/xo^uAa/ce?, who must all be over fifty. 

d 8. Sdrepa : a curious adverbial neuter ; " (he must be the 
father of children) of ojie sex or the other. '^ 

el. 6 TrpoKpiviov : this does not mean, any more than rbi/ 
alpovfjLevov at b 1 meant, that this official is to be appointed by one 
TTian ; the words would apply to anyone who took part in the 
appointment — either as nominator, voter, or SoKifid^oiv. — For the 
a)S with the ace. part. cp. on 643 d 8 and 762 e 5. 

e 2. The TratSo vo/xo? whom Lycurgus put in charge of the 
Spartan boys was to be elected €^ ^virep ai fxiyicrrai dpyaX 
KaO'LijTavTaL (Xen. Rejp. Lac. 2. 2). 

e 3. TravTos . . . yjj, " whatever the creature — whether plant 
or animal, tame or wild [or man] — if its early growth makes a good 
start, that is the most important step towards the happy con- 
summation of the excellence of which its nature is capable. Now 
man we hold to be a tame animal ; all the same, while with correct 
training, and a happy disposition, he will turn into the most 
divine and gentlest of creatures, if reared carelessly or ill, he is the 
fiercest creature upon earth." — The comma which Burnet inserts 
after opix-qSeicra guards against the error into which Ficinus, 
Serranus, and Jowett have fallen of connecting tt/oo? dpeTyjv with 
opfi-qdcLcra instead of with Kvpnnrdrrj. (Cp. below 931 e Trpos 
Oeotfukij fiotpav Kvpiwrara, Tim, 84 c KvpuitTara tt/oos Odvarovy and 
Ale. I. 120 e TcAcoL's ytyvea-Oai Trph<s dpeTijv.) 

e 5. The tov in Hermann's and Burnet's original text is of 
course a misprint for twv. 

766 a 1. I cannot help suspecting Kal dvOpioTriov to be a (very 
early) commentator's addition. The enumeration is complete 
without it. In grammatical form it is awkward ; the re and Kai 
best suit a pair, and the absence of rwv with dvOpioTnov increases 
the awkwardness. (Stobaeus's re after ■^/jLcpiov mends matters a 
little.) The case of the man is quite sufficiently introduced and 
considered in the following clause. Further, as they stand, the 
words imply that there are tame and wild men, as well as tame and 
wild beasts, and so anticipate what is given as a piece of fresh 
information in the following sentences. — Ast well cps. Aristotle, 
Pol. i. 2, 1253a31, who doubtless had this passage in mind when 
writing. 

a 4. F. A Wolfs conjecture that twv has fallen out after 
dypuoTarov is a very likely one. — So too Ast, independently. 

a 6 ff. irpCJTov Se . . . cTrt/xeAryTi^v : this difficult sentence has 

587 



766 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

suffered from many misapprehensions. To begin with, Aid. altered 
the MS. TrpocrTOLTTeLv iTTLfieXyjT't^v into irpocndnqv kol eTTiixeXyjT'qv, 
a mistake which even Eitter has perpetuated ; Hermann, to 
simplify the construction, rejected the important alpedrjvai, taking 
Tov jjbiWoi^Ta av. €7ri/xeA.7yoetr^at to be the vojxoOiTrjs ; Stallb. and 
Schanz follow him ; Schneider and Wagner translate ap^aaSai 
atpeOrjvaL by " auctorem fieri ut eligatur," " veranlassen dass . . . 
gewahlt werde," also understanding, as do Stallb. and Apelt, tov 
fxeXkovra ktX. to be the vojxoOeTrj<s instead of the director of 
Education ; these latter interpreters also make an awkward break 
in the sense after y, and separate tovtov, the manifest antecedent 
of o? av, from its relative ; further, Ritter unaccountably makes 
Twp €v TT) 7roA.€t depend on TrpQ)Tov instead of on a/atcrros. But it 
is Ritter who has shown us the right way out of the difficulty ; and 
that is to take xpeiiiv as an " accusativus absolutus," as at Thuc. iii. 
40. 4 ; " but inasmuch as the right choice of the man who is to have 
charge of them (TratSwv) is bound to come first and foremost, (he 
must) do his utmost to appoint and make their Director that man 
who out of all in the state is in every respect the best man." — Both 
auTwv in a 7 and avToh in b 1 refer to the children. — With twv 
cv . . . ^ cp. below 878 a 2 yevos oTTrcp av fj rwv ev rrj ttoXiel 
evSoKLfnoraTov irpos dpeTrjv. — With TrpocrrdTTi.iv we must supply 
Set from a 5. (Jowett slurs over the difficulty by putting for 
dp^aorOai )(^peci)v . . . alpeOrjvat, " he should begin by taking care 
that he is elected who etc. " ; otherwise he follows Schneider and 
Wagner. — I do not think that anything is gained by Apelt's 
ingenious substitution of ev^aorOai for dp^aa-dat, though it makes 
that part of the sentence easier from his point of view. 

b 2. TrXrjv /3ovXrjs k. tt. : the inclusion of the 360 /SovXevrat 
would have made the electing body unwieldy. — to tov 'AttoAAwvos 
Upov : a place peculiarly suitable for deciding a matter connected 

with pOVCTLK^. 

b 3. It is interesting to note that though all other interpreters 
and editors before Bekker took twi/ vo/xo ^vAa/cwv to be governed 
by Kpv/SS-qv, the Louvain editor (Rutger Ressen), while keeping the 
comma after vofxo(fivXdK(i)Vj shows, by putting a comma also before 
it, that he sees the right way to take the words. — ^e/aoi/Tcov 
\f'YJ(f)ov . . . ovTtv' av eK. -qy. : if xprjcfiov had been omitted, the 
antecedent to be supplied in thought with ovTiva would have been 
TovTov (cp. above on 753 d 1) ; as it is we must supply tovtw. 

b 5. The addition of y€vo/>tev(ov to twv (neut.) wepl TraiSetav 
is strange, and Hug would reject it ; but it would be stranger if 

588 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 766 b 

any commentator or scribe put it in when it was not there to 
begin with. The reason for its insertion was probably rhythmical. 
Plato would hardly end a sentence with five consecutive long 
syllables. 

b 7. TrXrjv vofxo<^vX6.Kiiiv : we are left to conjecture the reason 
for this exclusion. Could such great and wise men be suspected 
of jealousy? [F.H.D. says "yes" — "by others than the electing 
body."] 

c 2. Trplv . . . rj/x€p(jiv : in other words, " while there is more 
than a month of his time left to run." 

C 5. From Steph. onwards all edd. have fxcXov, which was the 
reading of A and 0. This was thoughtlessly corrected in A and 
to /xeXAov, probably the mistaken reading of some other MS. 

C 6. OL TrpocrrjKOVTe's : i.e. of the opcf^avot,, not of the iirirpoTros. — - 
KoX eTTLS-qixovvTcs : i.e. only those who lived within reach of the 
home circle. 

c 7. P'^XP'- oLvexf/LMv Tral8u)v : this definition of relations who are 
to count legally occurs below at 877 d 1 and 878 d 7 ; at Dem. G. 
Macart. p. 1067 we have p.^xp'' dvexJ/LdSoyv [TratSwv]. The same 
grade of relationship is expressed at 925 a 6 by p-^xpi- TraTTTrov 
7rai8o)v {vlSojv) : the grandchildren of the children of one's' grand- 
father are one's own first cousins one remove. — The only 
connexion between these two injunctions is that both are cases 
of substitution. A final revision would hardly have left them 
as they stand. 

d 3 flf. Before describing the appointment of this next kind 
of ofl&cials, i.e. the judges, Plato introduces a short preface in 
which the two main points are : (1) the judges must be men of 
superior intellect, and (2) the machinery for giving legal decisions 
must be such as will favour (a) clear presentment of cases, and (6) 
due deliberation. 

d 4. For Kara t/oottov see above on 635 d 7. — dcf)0)vo<s : below 
at 876 b he talks of SiKaa-TiqpLa <f>av\a Kal d<f)(Dva, which give 
their decisions by ballot. A true judge, Plato implies, ought to be 
able to throw light on the principles of justice which underlie the 
statutes, and not content himself with a safe legal yes or no, like a 
mere arbitrator. 

d 5. p.r] TrXeno nov avriStKWv €v rats dvaKptcrecri : the pre- 
liminary procedure for legitimizing the position of the two parties 
to the trial was naturally mostly formal. 

d 7. ovT€ TToAAov? 6vTa<s \ there are two reasons for this : (1) 
a large bench of judges could not all give reasoned judgements ; 

589 



766 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

it must be a question of voting yes or no ; and (2) the number of 
superior intellects is necessarily small. The tribunal must be both 
small and good. 

e 1. Trap' eKarepiDV goes closely with to a.ix(f>L(rf3rjTOvix€Vov ; 
" what the contention of each side is." 

e 2. KOL TO fSpaSv TO T€ TToXXoLKLS dvaKpLV€Lv '. in cffect ex- 
planatory of what is meant by 6 xpovos ; " tempus autem et mora, 
frequensque inquisitio ad aperiendam controversiam conferunt" 
(Fie). 

767 ^ 7. ovK apxiov . . . yLyverai, " while not a ruling official 
has yet a very high authority." The Kat emphasizes. 

a 9. Kptvoyv . . . oLTroTeXfj^ " finally decides." Cp. on 720 e 1. 

b 1. av €L€v 7r/)€7rovTes stands for irpkirouv av in the sense of 
" would be the right ones," i.e. " ought to be appointed." 

b 2. Tiviiiv and cKaa-rov are both neuter, and so too twv XoLirojv 
b 4. — KvpniiTarov : with this word obscurity begins. At first 
sight the words seem to be reintroducing us to the three tribunals 
mentioned at 766 e 3 ff. : (1) that of neighbours and friends; (2) 
the first court of appeal ; and (3) the final court 01 appeal. But, if 
KvptioraTov means, as Ficinus thinks, " augustissimum " (Schneider's 
"summa dignitate praeditum"), the epithet can hardly apply to a 
court composed of arbitrators informally appointed by the litigants 
themselves. (Below, at 915 c 6 the "neighbours'" court, and the 
alperol SiKao-rai are spoken of as two distinct courts.) Ritter 
thinks KvpidoTarov means " most competent " (" befugtest "). Even so, 
it would seem to exclude the notion of an appeal from it. 
Susemihl thought it a mistake for to tt^wtov — and it may perhaps 
be worth considering whether irpcoTov at c 2 and KvpcwTarov here 
may not, by some accident, have changed places. Some difficulties, 
but not all, would disappear if this transposition were made. I 
think Plato means that if both sides agree to the court, the decision 
is to be final. — As we proceed, we find, instead of the two appeal 
courts, two courts for the trial of different kinds of suits : (1) b 5, 
those suits in which one private citizen has a grievance against 
another : (2) b 7, those in which the alleged offence is one com- 
mitted against the state. — Still more puzzling is the question, 
what relation does the next court mentioned — that introduced at 
2 — bear to any or all of those just described ? The words to 
rpirov dixcfaa-fS-r^Tova-Lv seem to mark it as the third court (of appeal) 
mentioned above at a 2 f., and the words i8iwTats Trpos dXX'qXov's 
exclude the supposition that it is the court which is cognisant of 
offences against the state — that mentioned at b 7. If, however, 

590 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 767 b 

at c 1, we follow Burnet — alone among editors — in adopting tlie 
uncorrected reading of the MSS., and read Acktcov oTrotot, putting, 
with him, only a comma after fiorjOitv, we are driven to identify 
the Treason Court with the Court of final Appeal ; for we must 
translate : " but as for that (court) when someone thinks the state 
wronged by a citizen, we must say of what kind and who the 
judges (in that court) are"; and then follows the method of 
election of the judges of the Appeal Court. I think, as to this, 
that we cannot avoid taking O^'s correction, and reading AcKreov 8\ 
with a full stop after ftorjOelv. It might be thought that the two- 
fold division mentioned at b 4 {8vo 8r) ktA.) is to extend to both 
appeal courts ; that, perhaps, i.e. there were to be parallel courts — 
(1) second and third appeal courts for " Common Pleas," and (2) 
second and third for state trials ; but such a supposition does not 
agree with what we read at e 9 ff. — Plato, by calling this account 
of the courts a irepcypacfirj at 768 c 5, shows that he is conscious 
of the "sketchy" nature of this description. See below on 

768 b 4. 

c 2. irpdrov (if correct, and it most likely is) is adverbial, 
" first of all " (we must set up the third Appeal Court). 

C 4. TTcto-as ras dpxds, as shown when the subject to orvvcXOeLV 
is resumed at c 8, is used in the sense of iravTa^ toi>s dp^ovra^. 

C 6 f . cTTctSai/ . . . TrpocrdeVy " on the day before that on which 
the New Year is about to begin with the (new) moon that follows 
the summer solstice." 

d 1. All MSS. seem to have had ovofiocravTas — a thoughtless 
mistake due to the dittography of the last syllable of Oeov. — 
oLTrdp^acrdaL is used as a transitive verb governing eVa StKacrrr^v, 
in the sense of " offer as first-fruits " or perhaps " as a ceremonial 
dedication " — and so " consecrate" — Trd(rr)<s dp)(rjs eVa, " one from 
each body of magistrates." The gen. is governed by the ciTro in the 
verb ; dpx-q, as in the following line, is used as a collective noun. 

d 2. av . . . SiaKplveiv is " to be likely to decide." Cp. 

769 b 1 ovK dv TTOTC 8oK€L Trav(TacrOat Koa-fxovaa. — Wagner's sug- 
gestion that we should read SiaKpiveLv — like Heindorfs at Euth. 
287 d to read aTroKpivei for diroKpivrj — gratuitously adds one to 
the small list of doubtful cases of dv with the fut. Out of the 
list given by Adam on Rep. 492 c, and Goodwin, M. and T. 197, 
those at Crito 53 d, Crat. 391 d, and Phaedr. 227 b have only 
partial MS. support, while that at Euth. 287 d has no MS. 
support at all. The only instance left by Burnet in his text is 
Bep, 61$ d OvS' dv r/^€t Sevpo. 

591 



767 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

d 3. avTM : a possessive dat., used as a variety for avrov. 

d 5. avTois is probably the right reading, though the Cod. 
Voss. avTov points to a quite possible variant avrovs (ATTOTCAN 
being read ATTOTEAN). 

d 7. TOi<s TaAAa SiKaa-TTJpia (fivyovcrt : possibly (fyevyecv was a 
technical term used of those who " had recourse to " a higher 
court ; the notion being that the highest court was a place of 
refuge. Cp. Eur. Hipp. 1076 els tovs d(f)iovovs /xdpTvpas cfievyeis ; 

e 2. To-us eAo/xevovs avrovs : as Ritter points out, this would 
not be true of all individuals, only of the different magisterial 
bodies, each as a class. By that time many of the individuals 
who served in the previous year would have been replaced. 

e 3. edv Se TLS ktA. : this enactment may well apply, as Ritter 
thinks (p. 168), to all courts. 

e 5. vTrexcTU), " let him be under an obligation." 

e 6. TO riiiKTv : so the MSS. ; Ritter, comparing 846 b 3 — twv 
StTrAacrtwv v7ro8tKos ecrrw rw fSXacfidevTi — thinks this a mistake 
for TO SnrXdcTiov ; although it is only a minimum penalty, it may 
be all the injured man will get ; for ace. to e 8 f . anything beyond 
this is to be paid to the state and tcu r-qv Slkt^v StKao-aytxevw, 
and he might be an informer. Wherever rjixL(Tv comes from it is 
clearly a mistake. [F.H.D. suggests that the mistake arises from 
a misreading of a numerical expression.] 

e 8. All editors but Wagner have adopted the Aid. tovto) for 
the MS. TovT(Dv ; Trpos tovtujv would involve a feeble tautology, 
— " the judges are to decide what penalty they are to suffer at 
thdr" (i.e. " the j udges'") "hand." 

e 9. TTcpl 8e Twv 8r]fjiO(TL(ov eyKXrj/xdTOiv : here we go back to 
the court first referred to at b 7, for the trial of offences against 
the state. In this the public is to take an important part. 
Whereas, in the tribal courts for trying suits between private 
citizens, the public is only represented by a section of itself, 
elected by lot, in state trials the jury, as we should call it, is 
to be the whole Srjfxos — the Public Assembly of all the citizens. 

768 a 1-5. Burnet has made the connexion of ideas clearer by 
marking off ol yap . . . SLaKpiceiov as a parenthesis. This 
parenthesis gives the reason for the arrangement outlined in the 
main sentence, which is as follows : " (It is necessary) in the first 
place to admit the public to a share in the trial (of state offences) 
. . . but, while the inception, and the final decision of such a 
suit must lie with the whole body of citizens, still the investiga- 
tion must be conducted by such three of the highest order of 

592 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 768 a 

magistiateri as the defendant and plaintiff shall agree on." To 
the fi€v in a 1 corresponds the cxAA' in a 4, which is " resumed " 
by the 8e in a 5 ; (^PXV^ re . . . aTroSiSofxevrjv is a concessive 
clause. 

a 3. €v SiKy, "justly" ("and they would justly resent being 
excluded from all share in such decisions "). 

a 5. ev is technically used of the court before which a case is 
tried. — Apparently then the Public Assembly had to give leave to 
prosecute, and to acquit or condemn (and assess the penalty), on 
a report from a competent legal tribunal who had investigated the 
case. It is to be noticed that this leaves no room for the influence 
of rhetoric on the susceptible pubHc. 

a 8. L, and several other MSS., for avTot — which is clearly 
right — read avrot? ; this reading occurs as a marginal variant in 
O, and was printed in the four first edd. Ficinus would seem 
to have read avr-qv, as he translates " consilium ipsum electionem 
utriusque cognoscat et judicet." (Possibly a scribe in whose ears 
avToi and avr-q sounded alike, wrote the latter by mistake ; this 
then became avTTjv in one MS. and avTrj<s in another, this last 
changing back to avrot? by the converse of the original error. 
There is no trace of a reading avrco.) — kiriKpiv€tv avrOtv rrjv 
atpecTLv (Karcpov : airrwv probably depends on cKarepov — " the 
choice of each of them," not "the choice of them (i.e. judges) 
made by each." Most likely each litigant chose one judge ; the 
difficulty would be to agree on the third. If each persisted in 
his own choice for the third judge, the fSovX-j would have to 
select one of the two. It would therefore be manifestly unwise 
for either of the litigants to choose a decided partisan. — By 
fiovXiq we ought perhaps to understand the irpvrdvwi, who were 
a standing committee of the jSovXrj. — The Itti- in kiriKpiviLv seems 
to mark the action of a superior authority. 

b 2. 6 yap a.KOLviovrjTO's . . . ctvat, " no man can feel himself 
a true citizen, who does not share the right of pronouncing 
judgement on his fellows." This little piece of political wisdom 
helps to form a true conception of the state, and citizenshij). It 
may rank with another enlightening little sentence at 740 a 2-4, 
which reminds us that the land which belongs to a citizen also 
belongs to the state. 

b 4. The Kat marks the ^vActiko, ^iKaa-rr^pia as a fresh 
tribunal, and yet at b 7 below they seem to belong to the class 
of courts of first appeal mentioned above at 767 a 2 (aAAo 
SiKacrrripLov). Stallbaum is inclined to regard them as alternatives 

VOL. I 593 2 Q 



768 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

to the court of neighbours and friends ; but in that case there 
would be only one appeal court, and it is clearly laid down at 
767 a 3 that there are to be two. See also 915 c 5 f. which 
distinctly speaks of the neighbours' courts as distinct from and 
inferior to the <jivXeriKaL StKai. The truth seems to be that in 
this Treptypacfyr) (c 5) Plato did not attempt to give us a complete 
plan of courts as they might be arranged in detail, but only to 
enumerate certain leading principles of such an arrangement ; e.g. 
(1) that there must be separate courts for state and private 
trials ; (2) that there must be a second and a final court of 
appeal ; (3) that this final court must be carefully constituted. 

b 5. €K Tov Tvapaxprj/Jia : these words mark the contrast 
between the elaborate constitution of the final appeal court and 
the haphazard choice, for the tribal courts, of the first citizens at 
hand, as occasion demanded. Probably it was not contemplated 
that the whole tribe should be assembled for their election. — It 
seems to be hinted by the coupling together of the three points of 
(1) election by lot, (2) election as occasion demanded — i.e. when 
there was a cause to try — and (3) the inaccessibility to motives of 
personal sympathy, that somehow (3) was more likely to be found 
in conjunction with (1) and (2). — Perhaps these tribal courts were 
conceived as country courts, and the second Appeal Court in the 
city would sit more regularly, and be of a more elaborate constitu- 
tion. — Both KX-qpu) and ck tov Trapaxprj/J-a logically qualify 
some such word as " be appointed " ; this idea is implied in 

hi. o cfjajxev . . . 7rap€(TKevda-6ai, " which we assert to have 
been endowed with as complete an impartiality as the wit of man 
could devise." 

b 8. No editors put a comma after Trapea-Kevda-dat ; i.e. they 
all take roU fxr) ^vvajxkvoL<i with it, and not with Kptveiv. I 
prefer, though not very confidently, to take the dat. with Kpiveiv, 
and would therefore insert a comma before rots. — Ficinus for 
(f>a/x€v TrapecTKevda-OaL has " esse debere diximus," as if he had 
read Trapaa-Kevaa-riov. — tois is masc. ; Fie. takes it to be neut. 
('' ad eas lites dirimendas "). 

C 1. The (fivXcTLKd SiKaa-T-qpLa are mentioned below at 915 c 5. 

C 2. At 915 c 5 a7raXAaTT€o-6'at, when used in exactly the 
same connexion as here, is expanded by the addition of tt/oos 
dkXriXovs and twv kyKX-qp^dnav ; Ast is therefore probably right 
{Lex. s.v.) in giving to the word in these two passages, not its 
ordinary sense of " get rid of," " finish with," but the meaning 

594 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 7^8 C 

wliich is more commonly found for 8taAAaTT€o-^at, and KaraA- 
XdrreaOaL, of " to be reconciled, compound their differences." 

C 6. eip-qKev : this TrpocnoTroTroua is like that which Plato often 
uses in the case of 6 Aoyos ; it is still more marked in the ravrat? 
. . . elpTJ(rO<x) two lines below. — to. 8' (XTroAeiTrei : it is possible 
that Ttt is nom. here, but most likely dTroXeliret is used, as at liep. 
603 d 9 (6 Tore aTreAiVo/xei/) in the unusual sense of omit — This 
use of a qualifying crxeSov is 'a mannerism with Plato in his later 
works. — Again L has the best reading, A and O giving aTroAeiVot 
(probably meant as an opt. of wish : " some points, however, it 
had perhaps better leave out "). 

C 7. v6fjL0)v decTLS is equivalent to a compound noun, and, as 
such, it and not merely Oecrcs is coupled with Sialpecrts as 
the subject of the verb ytyvotro. It means regulation, and 
Plato would no doubt have used vofiodeaia for it, if he had not 
used that word just before. The two subjects which are best 
reserved for a final chapter are (1) the detailed regulation of 
legal and judicial procedure, and (2) the elaborate distinction 
between the different kinds of suits — and consequently of courts 
to try them in. The a/xa marks that the aKptf^-qs goes with 
both vopiov dea-LS and Siaipecrts. (All previous interpreters have 
adopted the view that both ^etrts and Scat/aecris are to be con- 
strued with 8tK<jjv vo/xwv : " judicialium legum exacta positio atque 
partitio " Fie. Stephanus proposed to read StKaviKwv for 8lko)v. 
Bekker would reject vopoiv [and so F.H.D.], which is left out in 
one MS. (Vat. 1029), and Orelli would read vojxlkwv for it.) 

c 8. TavTttts ktA., " let these subjects be told to wait till we 
have reached the end " — lit. " to wait for us at the end." 

d 2. TTjv 7rXeL(TT7]v . . . vofiodeo-Lav : the contrast with subjects 
said to be half treated shows that this means "have received their 
full regulation," not " have occupied the most of our legislative 
attention " (Wagner and so Jowett). For the use of TrAeto-xTy for 
complete cf. Rep. 564 a SovAeta TrAeto-rry, Soph. 249 e ev dyvoi(^ 
Trj TrXeKrTrj. 

d 3. TO 8e oAov . . . (Ta(f>€s : like Schanz, I would certainly 
print Ast's 8L0LK-q(TLv for the MS. 8totK7^(rea>v. " But a complete 
and exact description of every single department of the state 
and of civic administration in general, is impossible " — (with 
8LOLKrj(T€iov : " about every single point in the arrangements of 
the state and of the whole civic administration "). Objections to 
the MS. reading are (1) the two words 8tot/<7yo-eis and ttoXltlkij 
would both mean the same thing, i.e. management^ control ; (2) the 

695 



768 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

use of TroXiTiKyj as an adj.jis more in accordance with Platonic usage 
than its use as a subst., and when Plato does use it as a subst., 
it is generally — as e.g. at 650 b 9 — in the sense of the science or 
art of government (Wagner tries, in vain, I think, to fit that sense 
in here) ; (3) the dependence of rtov SiotK-qcreiov on the neut. evos 
Tc KOL TrdvTMv, OT ou TO oAov T€ Kol aK/c>t(/?€5), though not 
impossible, is awkward. 

d 5. For this use of Su^oSos in the sense of enumeration, 
account, cp. above 718 b 2. A sketch of the whole, he says, must 
precede the details of the parts, because in the explanation of 
these details a reference to other departments is often necessary. 
Cp. below 812 a 8. 

d 7. Here he goes on to say that we have now reached the 
right {iKavi/]) point in our sketch where the subject of the appoint- 
ment of magistrates may end for the present, and the account of 
laws proper begin. Ficinus and Schneider take yevo/xevT^s as a 
gen. abs. with Trjs Sce^oSov understood — the latter translating it 
by "quoniam progressa est." Wagner takes yev. with aLp€cr€0)s — 
" bis zur erfolgenden Wahl der Obrigkeiten." The former, is clearly 
the right view. " You see {vvv /at^v), at this point, now that the 
general outline has been completed as far as the election of 
magistrates, this would be a fit conclusion for the preliminary 
part of our subject." 

e 2. Kttt connects LKav-q — which is supposed to be carried on 
to apx^ — with dv. kol okv. ov. €ti Seojxivrj ; the failure to see this 
led the first three printed edd. to substitute ccrrt for the MS. eVt. 
Though Bas. 2 corrected this error, it reappeared in Steph. 

e 7. ^iXtws : what specially pleases the Athenian's hearers is 
that he has enabled them to see the subject as a whole in its two 
main divisions of (1) Political Machinery, and (2) Legal Enactment. 

769 a 1. Above at 685 a 7 the Ath. says Trepl vofxiov Tvat^ovTas 
Trac^totv 7rp€(T/3vTLKr]v crw^/oova, and at 712 b 1 Tretpw/xe^a . . ., 
KaOdirep TralSes TrpecrfSvTai, TrAaTreiv rw Aoyw tovs vofxovs. 
There is the same contradiction of terms in Parmenides's Tr/aay- 
lxaT€L(x)87] TratSiav irai^CLv {Parm. 137 b) as in the ep^cfypiov TratStot 
. . . Sta7r€7rat(r/x€i/i7 here : TratSta involves the notion of a pastime, 
and of make-helieve ; but there is a method and a meaning in this 
7rat8ta, as is shown by the words TrpayfxaTetioSrjs and e/x^/owv. 

a 3. This contrast is still further brought out by Cleinias's 
answer. The connexion between the two remarks is better seen 
when we notice that the first begins with KaAw? and the second 
with KaX'qv. " A fine game," the Ath. says : " A fine piece of 

596 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 769 a 

work," Cleinias answers. Notice also the contrast between 
irpea-fivTiov and dvSfjiov. — 8r)\.ovv is "set forth," "display." The 
"work" is the actual constitution of Oleinias's new state. 

a7ff. 01&6' oTt ktA., "just as the artist's brush, you know, 
seems never to get to the end of its work upon the several figures 
in his picture, but looks as if it were going on everlastingly 
heightening colour or 'relieving' it, or whatever the initiated call 
the process, — never reaching the point at which it admits of no 
further increase of beauty or vividness." (to, yey/oa/x^eya comes in 
better earlier in the English sentence.) Ast wished to eject 
Kada-jvep^ but it is better to suppose a conversational inconsequence 
— "just as the artist's brush, you know," standing for "you know 
how the artist's brush " ; the KaOdrrep enables us to put in the 
" how," and marks the simile. 

a 8. C^o)^ : though ^wov is used for " picture " below at c 1 and 5, 
I think Ast and Stallb. are wrong in translating {"wwy by 
^^ pictures" here ; it is " figures." 

a 9. d7rox/3ati/€4v : at Arist. I)e color. 796 a 24, where, however, 
there is a variant ciTrox/aw^eTat, this verb is taken to mean " to 
change the colour of." If, however, it means here to change, or to 
tone down, or simply to remove colour, as some have thought, the 
expression is too straightforward to be technical ; and that is what 
the subsequent words proclaim it to have been. At Rep. 586 c 1 
spurious pleasures are said to look like real pleasures because they 
are " thrown into relief" (d7ro;^pa6vo/>t€i/as) by adjacent pains. The 
sense of " throw up," " relieve " (by adjacent contrast) also exactly 
suits our present passage. Therefore I think Ast and Stallb. 
right (but see Adam, on the Republic passage) in taking the use 
in the two Platonic passages to be the same. (A.M.A. holds that 
aTrox/oatVetv describes removal of colour, the relief being obtained by 
contrast, which normally consists of removal or darkening of 
adjacent colour. The explanation of diro^^^paiveiv in Tim. Lex. 
— TO rd xpiixrOevra ivoiroielv — does not help us much, unless it 
be thought that ^^combination" of colours is akin to the bring- 
ing out the force of one colour by the juxtaposition of a contrasted 
one.) — Tov XP- V a^oX/^- ^^^ Kou-piova-a both depend, in different 
ways, upon iravcraa-dai. 

b 1. For ot ^(jjypdcfujiv TraiSes cp. above on 720 b 5. — dv wav- 
o-acrdai is just like dv SiaKptveLV at 767 d 2. 

b 2. oSo-Tc : the words ovk dv ttotc . . . Travaaa-OaL contain the 
idea "will never reach a particular final point," and on this idea 
depends " such as to admit of no further improvement." 

597 



769 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

b 5. cTret, "alioqui," Ast ; cp. on 669 b 6. A clear case of cTret 
^^althoaghJ' All interpreters but Ast and Jowett seem to have 
taken (xkovcov as governing ravra, as if 01. said " listening to your 
words teaches me," and translate €7rei by since, or for, as if it 
introduced a reason why it was only by such listening that he 
could learn. This is far-fetched. What 01. says is : " / know pretty 
well from hearsay what you mean, though I am no expert in the 
painter's craft." — The Kal avrds is best translated by emphasizing 
the first 7. 

b 6 tf . " That doesn^t matter ; we can easily use the above- 
mentioned fact about it as an illustration." 

b 7. u)S is epexegetic of to roiovSe — "nempe, scilicet" (Ast). — 
" Let us put it to the following use — such as to ask ..." 

c 1. {"wov : a survival of the Gk. use of ^wov — " living creature " 
— for ^^pieture^^ may perhaps be seen in the Art term "still life." 
c 1-8. From Ast downwards, all edd. have adopted Van Heusde's 
correction of the MS. t€(os to re ws ; but there remain two violent 
breaks in the construction — quite {pace 0. Apelt p. 4) beyond the 
range, I think, of Platonic anacoluiha. The second is the jump 
from Tov €7ravopdovv re in c 4 to otos re 'iarrai in c 6. This is 
entirely obviated by supposing, with Herm., that Plato wrote not 
TOV but OS before i-rravopOovv. Schanz alone ventures to follow 
Herm. in his text. The t€ and the Kai link the two clauses 
together in a way which is impossible if the text stands as the 
MSS. have it. — The earlier break is in c 1-3 koI tovt . . . xpovov, 
and should be remedied, I think, by inserting <t€vat> after del — 
for which some early copies seem to have had Srj. If this 8r] was 
a true variant, and not a corrector's guess, it points to some 
confusion in the text at this point ; and it does not seem impossible 
that 6€vat — which exactly represents Ficinus's progrediatur — should 
have been accidentally omitted. Without some such addition I 
think it is impossible to arrive at any of the renderings which 
have been given for the passage. The to before (fyavXoTcpov in 
02 I take to be a guess, made to bring it into line with to jScXtlov, 
by a corrector who did not see that the to does not go with 
jScXtlov but with tcrxctv (intr.). Whether we insert the to or not, 
we cannot construe the sentence satisfactorily if we take To-xetv as 
transitive ; nor has tcrxeiv', however we take it, any satisfactory 
predicate in the received reading. Ficinus's rendering is : " quod 
non ad peius sed ad melius futuro tempore progrediatur." (A.M.A. 
suggests taking tovt to be the subject to to-x^tv in the sense of 
yiyvccrBai — cp. /^cATtwv yuyvrjTai at e 1.) 

598 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 769 c 

C 3. crvvvoei^i, **iionne vides?" Fie. All edd. except Ast print 
the whole sentence as a question. 

C 5. (edv Ti cr<fiaX.XrjTaL . . .) viro xp6v(j}v : cp. Tim. 22 d 8ia 
fjiaKpoiv XpoviDV yiyvofxevrf tmv cttI yrjs irvpl ttoXAw cfidopd. The 
pi. xpovoL seems to have been a mannerism of Plato's later style ; 
cp. Laws 850 b 5, 798 b 1, 872 e 6, 680 a 4, 738 d 5, {Phil. 36 b 6). 
C 6. TTpbs rtjv T€XVY]v goes, not with Trapakm^Okv, as Schneider 
— " praetermissum ad artem," — but with d(r6ev€La<s — " wegen seiner 
eigenen Schwache in der Kunst" (Wagner). Cp. Laws 757 c 3 
/x€i^ovL 7rph<s dp€T7]Vj Prot. 318 c 4 irphs ypacf>LKr]v (JSeXTLuy ecrea-Oat 
. . . Kttt cTTtSwo-eiv), Phaedr. 263 d 5 rexviKwrepas Trpbs Xoyovs, 
Ale. I. 120 e 4 irXeiovs . . . Tr/abs dperi^v. 

c 8. All edd. but Herm. follow Steph. in emending the MS. 
TTapapaviL to Trapaficvet. 

d 1-e 1. " Well, don't you think the lawgiver will want to do 
likewise : — first to frame laws as nearly perfect as may be, and 
then, as time goes on, and he finds how his plans work in practice, 
is there, think you, a lawgiver in creation so foolish as to be blind 
to the fact that there must be numberless details left in a condition 
which will need the attention of a correcting hand, if the 
administrative system of the state he has founded is to go on 
getting more perfect instead of less ? " 

d 6. If TrapaXiLTreardai is right, it ought not to be translated as 
if it were a simple AetVeo-^at — "be left behind him" — as do Fie, 
Schn., and Wagn. It must be " that there are many omissions, or 
deficiencies" (for successors to correct). I think it possible, though, 
that the simple AetTrecr^at is what Plato wrote. It is like him to 
vary the expression of a corresponding passage ; and like a com- 
mentator to make the two passages uniform. As it is, the MS. 
text is somewhat redundant. [F.H.D. thinks Plato meant Trapa- 
AeiTTco-^at.] — We may imagine Plato applying this analogy to a 
philosopher, and the doctrines which he leaves to his school. — 
(TweTTOfMevov does not, I think, denote following the lawgiver, but 
attending to the laws — the same notion as is contained in the 
<f)vXdTT€Lv (kul kwavopdovv) at e 7. 

e 1. irepi c. ace. is equal to a possessive genitive. Cp. on 685 c 2. 
e 3. For TTws yap ov ; inserted in the middle of a sentence 
Heindorf on Gorg. 487 b cps. Soph. Electra 1307 aAA' olcrda fxev 
rdvOcvScj TTw? yap ov ; kXvwv. Steph. was the first to suggest the 
correct punctuation of this passage. — rravra ovtlvovv : I have not 
been able to find another instance of Tras 6crTL(T{ovv) declined as if 
it were ttus tis. 

599 



769 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

e 5 ff. Burnet is clearly right in taking epyw kol Aoyot? with 
8i8d^€uv av rather than with iiy]\avr]v e'x^t, though he has only 
Ficinus among previous interpreters on his side. — riva t/oottov 8t8. 
av is a dependent interrogative explaining what rovro is ; the 
StSa^etev av after rlva rpoirov is just like the ytyvoLT av after 
oTTws at 770 d 1. As A, ace. to Schanz, has rti/a the scribe evidently 
took 8l8. to be the apodosis to et €Xol. — etVe [xeL^ova €lt€ eAaTTW : 
some make this agree with enpov (Fie), some with evvoiav 
(Schneider, Wagner) ; Jowett takes it with Tpoirov. The alternatives 
already mentioned admit of six different translations of the passage ; 
and there is further the doubt which has been felt whether irplv 
k-rrl reXos kXdelv means (1) "until he has finished his explanation," 
or (2) "until he succeeds in his object," or (3) Stallb. thinks it may 
mean "while life lasts." (2) is right, I think. — As to the reading 
in e 5, Aid. was no doubt right in correcting the MS. rovrov 
to TovTO. Possibly the scribes understood tovtov to be rov 
vop.od€Ti]v, but more likely the final v was accidental. (I think 
Fie. read rtva, and either read or put in a Kat after vofxovs ; but 
his translation is not literal enough to indicate his reading clearly.) 
We may translate : " Well, supposing a man discovers a way to 
teach another, however imperfectly, by precept or example, the 
right method of conserving or improving laws, he will persevere, 
won't he, in his explanation of his method, until he succeeds ? " 

770 a 6. €v 8v(r/xais rod fSiov: the reading at Arist. Poet. 1457 
b24, which attributes this phrase to Empedocles, rests on inferior 
MS. authority ; but it looks like a sensible correction of Aristotle's 
text, and may even have had the support of some independent 
tradition unknown to us. 

a 8. Kat TovTov<s, " them too " (as well as ourselves). — avTovs, 
" at the same time," goes with the following words. (Schneider's 
" hos quoque ipsos " is pointless.) 
b 1. CI. " Certainly ; if we can.'^ 

b 5. 17/xets TrapLTToXXa TrapaXelxj/oixev, " we lawgivers shall leave 
innumerable deficiencies in each of the subjects about which we 
legislate " ; i.e. " in every division of our legislation." — For the 
omission of TrepL with S>v cp. above 659 a 7 €k ravrov crro/xaTos 
ovTrep Tovs Ocovs eVeKaAeo-aTO, 714d2 irpos aXXo tl ... "^ to 
crvpLcficpov. 

b 6 flf. ov p.rjv dW . . . TrepL-qy-qdiv, " at the same time we shall 
do our best to provide what I may call a sketch of the important 
details, and the general outline. This sketch it will be for you to 
turn into the finished picture." 

600 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 77OC 

C 2. avrdj " what it is " — the guiding principle, i.e., indicated 
by the words ottoc ^Acttovtcs. It is the same as ravra eh airep 
ktX. at c 5. — The following passage is a reminiscence of 630 e 2 
and 631 d, which is again recalled below at 963 a 3. 

C 7-e 6. " Our unanimous decision amounted briefly to this : 
in whatsoever way our citizen's nature, be it of man or woman, 
young or old, was likely to achieve a full measure of the excellence 
of soul of which it is capable, as the result of some occupation, 
some habit, some kind of possession or desire, or opinion, or of 
some mental discipline, towards this same object every nerve shall 
be strained as long as life lasts ; nobody in any station must show 
a preference for any kind of thing that thwarts these means (of 
achieving perfection) ; he must sacrifice even the state, if it appears 
necessary that it should be overturned, sooner than see it bow to a 
servile yoke at the bidding of its meaner citizens, or else he must 
give up the state and become an exile. Any such fate must be 
suffered by men sooner than they should accept a regime productive 
of their deterioration." 

d 1. oLvrip ayaOos is predicate, the subject being (fivcris in d 4. 
— Fot yiyvoLT av cp. on 769 e6. 

d3. For TTotas Krr]G-e.it}<i Apelt (1901 Prag) would read ttot* 
acnfri(T€<s><i ; after eTriTT^Seii/xaTos, hc^wever, ao-/<r^€ws is de trop. 
[F.H.D. " probably right ; see 896 d."] — The (€k) /xa^r^/xarwv ttotc 
TLi'(j}v is a foreshadowing of the aKpcfiea-rkpa TratScia of 965 b 1. 

d 5. This oTTws is the indirect form of cos, and introduces the 
gist of the above-mentioned a-vyx^prjons. 

d 6. Stephanus's restoration of rerap.kvq for the MS. T€Tayp.€vr) 
is confirmed by Ficinus's " omni studio tendat." 

d 7. TovTots is not (as Ficinus) "this object," but these kirirr]- 
Sev/xara, ridr^ ktX. 

e 1. fw^S' 6(Tri(Tovv : i.e. whether he be an ofl&cial or a private 
citizen. (Stallb. prefers p-q^' ortovv, which occurs in a MS. of no 
authority.) — TcAevTwj/ : so MSS. Here we approach the central 
knot in this bundle of entanglement. I see no way of untying it. 
It has been cut in different ways. From Stallb. I would adopt 
the change of the MS. vTropelvaa-a to vTvopeivacrav, and I would 
put a comma after yiyveo-Oaij and read reXevrav for reAevTwv, 
taking it with ttoAcws in the sense of "part with the state," 
" sacrifice the state " (on the analogy of f^Lov, Xoyov rekevTav). It 
seems to me that we want two alternatives of which r) AetVeti/ is 
the second, the infinitives being governed by an imaginary " but 
must choose " implied, by contrast, in p,rj8ev 7rpoTip.wv. If we 

601 



770 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

have no such infinitive in the place of reAevrwv we are driven (with 
Fie.) to take WkXecv ktX. as the alternative to XeLTretv — i.e. (do 
something) "sooner than either sit down under the rule of mean 
men, or go into exile "; and it is not clear what the "something" is : 
Ficinus takes it to be "die for his country." But even if he could 
get this out of reXevrwv Se Kal TroAecos, and could fit in lav . . . 
ytyuea-dai, the words Travra to, rotavra in e 4 imply that more 
sacrifices (than that of life alone) have been mentioned. His 
translation is : " Pro patria praeterea, si necesse sit, mori paratus 
sit antequam velit aut eversam videre civitatem iugoque servitutis 
subiectam a peioribus gubernari, aut fuga ipsam deserere." — Of the 
alternatives as I read them, the latter (exile) would only be 
adopted when the " right minded " were too few to make a fight ; 
the former danger (extinction of the state) would result when 
neither side was strong enough to gain the upper hand, and they 
destroyed each other. (Ast would read koI ttoAcws dvao-Taros, 
€av dv. (f)., ytyv., and iVo/xetvas ; his two alternatives then are 
(1) banishment, (2) flight. — Stallb. keeps avacrrarov, makes TroAeto? 
depend on it, reads I'Tro/xetVao-av, and, like many editors, puts 
only a comma after ttoAiv. Wagner would read to TroAews for 
TToAews ; he supplies, I imagine, eai' dvdyKT] cfiaLvrjTai with Aei- 
ireiv. With these two interpreters ws in e 4 is not for, but that. 
Schanz reads vTro/JL€Lvas with Ast, and rejects r| with Madvig.) 

e 7- ^/xets, like the rjfxets at b 5, is emphatic : that was " we 
lawgivers" ; this is "you vo/xo^vAaKes." — i^/zwv goes with tovs 
vojxovs. — The ravra cKarepa (and the ravra in the following line) 
are not, as Ast and Stallb., (1) private, and (2) public, virtue, but 
(1) the encouragement of such pursuits etc. as are helpful to virtue 
(d 2), and (2) the discouragement of oiroa-a efxiroSca tovtol<s (d 7). 
— I accept unhesitatingly 0. Apelt's (p. 11) restitution of kirdviTe 
for the MS. kiraivdTe. ; " pass in review " exactly describes the 
action proper to the vojxocfivXaKes. Above at 708 e 1, and all 
the inferior MSS. had eTraivwv where A alone had preserved 
€7ravi(ov. Cp. also 693 c 6, Theaet. 186 b 8. 

771 a 1. Ficinus puts in eas inquam vituperate after 1/0/xovs ; 
acting on this hint, or on one from Cornarius, Steph. silently 
inserts xj/ky^re /xev into the Gk. text at that point. 

a 3. T(5v aya^cov Xeyofxkvojv : the worst of it is that some of 
these €/x7ro5ta — e.g. great wealth — are regarded as legitimate objects 
of ambition. 

a 5. dpxrj 8k . . . 7)py/j.kv7], " we must next begin our laws 
somewhat as follows, keeping religion in view from the first." 

602 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 771a 

That is, we must obtain the sanction of religion to our political 
divisions and arrangements. (He has said this before, at 738 b ff., 
with reference to the territorial divisions.) 

a 6. avakafielv is rather more than " call to mind " ; at 738 b 2 
those concerned were bidden " to give their minds to " {Xaf^elv) the 
arithmetic of the civic arrangements : here we are told to " give 
our minds to it again" and in this case to consider the subdivisions 
of 5040. 

* a 7. €ix^v is the " philosophic " imperfect — " how many we 
found that it had." 

b 1. 7r/3oo-<^o/Dovs, " convenient." 

b 3. opdorara, "exactly." — In <f>vv, Oeov SoJ/jov, and crv/Kfivroi' 
at b 5 and 7 Plato emphasizes the notion that the properties of 
number lie deep in the nature of things. 

b 4. €Kd(TTr}v . . . TTjv fjiotpav, " each of these twelfths." 

b 5. tepdv : Ficinus's translation " sacrum esse dei munus," 
though it fits Steph.'s conjectural le/aoi/, does not prove that he 
had not our MS. text before him. He always allows himself a 
translator's right to vary modes of expression. The gender of 
kirofiivrjv is in favour of Updv. — CTTo/xevryv, " corresponding to." 

b 6 ff. ry Tov TravTos TrcpioSw : " haud dubie ad orbem signiferum 
s. zodiacum haec spectant," Ast. — 6to . . . Stavofn^v, " that is 
just why its instinct sways every city by consecrating these 
divisions, though some (authorities) perhaps make a more exact 
partition and consecrate it with more happy results than others." 
8t6 is strengthened by Kat as at Epist. 335 a 6, and Phaedr. 258 c 4. 

b 7. For ayciv used in this absolute sense cp. Eur. Hipp. 
1268 (TV rav Oeujv aKafXTrrov (f)p€va Kal fSporoiv dyeis, KvTrpt. 
— Ficinus takes lepovv to be an inf., translating ducit 
. . . ad eas sacrandas ; though such a statement fits the context 
far better than any translation we can get out of Upovv as a 
participle, ayetv cannot be used in the sense of compels (to do 
something). Is it possible that we ought to read lepova-av = 
"leads them along a course of hallowing of the divisions"? (Ast, 
Schneider, and Wagner take Traa-av ttoXlv to be totam civitatem.) 

c4 f. €7r6 ddrepa vyirj<^ ytyi/erat, "you can mend it one way." 
There are two ways of arriving at an exact multiple of eleven, 
either by addition or subtraction (Wagner). — aTrovefiav does not 
mean exactly " to subtract" but " to set aside." This meaning 
comes out clearly when there is no dative of the person or thing 
to which something is assigned; e.g. at Polit. 276 d rr^v 
dirovepLTideia-av iirtiJieXrjTiK'qv it means " which is made into a 

603 



771 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

special class." Cp. also Laws 848 a 7. (Grou conjectured aTro- 
T/JtTjOeicraLv^ and Ast accepted it. Ficinus takes irrl Odrepa with 
aTroveixTjOeLcraLV, " si ... ad alteram partem . . . accesserint.") 

cl. TTJ TTapova-rj 4^'^IJ^XI '^^^ ^^7^ • hendiadys, " the principle 
just enunciated." 

d 1. ravrrfv : Schneider, who translates " et distributionem 
hanc faciamus," apparently takes Tavrrjv to stand for rr^v Siavofxrjv 
Tavr-qv ; all other interpreters take it to mean r-qv ttoXlv or r-qv yryv. 
Ast reads avri^v for it. Ficinus leaves it out in his translation. 

d 3. €7r' avToh : i.e. at the altars (Schn. "ad eos" ; apparently 
he takes aurots to refer to the patron deities). 

d 4. SwScKtt }xkv . . . 8ta/x,€/3tcryu,a> : apparently each tribe had 
one rural, and one urban festival every month ; the former for 
the tribe as a whole, the latter for that tribe's division of the city 
proper (cp. above 745 e 2). 

d 5. deOiv . . . ^eous : in the previous exposition of the 
advantages of these religious (tvvo^oi or avWoyoi at 738 d 6, the 
advantages were likewise represented as being of two kinds : (1) 
religious, and (2) social. The second class there corresponds 
almost exactly to the second class here. The first there was 
expressed in the difficult words ottws av . . . ets ras \p€ia^ 
eKOLCTTas cv/xapetav TrapacTKevd^wa-L. The words which here repre- 
sent the first class I take to mean " to secure the favour of 
heaven and all the heavenly influences," taking twv irepl Oeov^ as 
well as dewv to depend on ^^a/jtros. At 796 c 3 we shall find a 
similar difficulty in dealing with the elusive word X'^P'-^ — "^V^ '^V^ 
Oeov X^P''^ Tt/jtwi/ras. Here it has generally been interpreted to 
mean either gratitude, or worship (and by some twv Trepl ^eovs is 
made to depend directly upon eveKo) : " primum quidem diis 
habendae gratiae et rerum divinarum causa " (Schneider) — " haec 
deorum primo divinorumque colendorum gratia ita fiant" (Ficinus). 
(A.M.A. agrees with this.) 

d 7. tos cf^ai/jiev dv marks the inclusion of the last named object 
as an opinion for which the speaker is personally responsible. 
The necessity of mutual acquaintance to the members of a com- 
munity was enlarged on at 738 e 1 ff. 

e 1. TT/oos, " in view of." 

e 2. TTjv dyvoiav . . . €/c8t8(ucri : wv, a, and ois are generaliz- 
ing neuters ; tovtwv (depending on dyvotav) has to be supplied 
in thought as their antecedent. — tl<s is almost equal to a plural — 
"people." — We may translate: "to put an end to ignorance of 
brides' families and brides themselves, as well as of families into 

604 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 771 g 

which daughters marry." For the neut. plur. cp. irp^irovra at 772 
d 7, and Soph. Ant. 659 66 yap to. y' eyyevrj (f>v(r€L aKocr/ia Bpkxpiaj 
Kapra rovs e^w yevovs, and Soph. Phil. 448 f. There is no need, 
with Ast, to write y]v for a. 

e 5. (TTTovSyjs . . . TraiSias . . . ^opivovTa^ : Plato is never 
tired of finding " earnest " in pleasurable sport; cp. 672 e 5 0X17 
fxiv TTov yopela oXrj TratSevcris "qv ^f^^^j and 666 c 2 ttjv irepl ras 
Movcra^ TraiSeiav re /cat TratStav, and the place assigned to 
pleasure^ and festivals in the theory of education as expounded at 
653 c ff. 

772 a 2. /xerot . . . Trpocf)d(r€L<s : this is not to be done at all 
times, and as a matter of course ; a reason must be assigned, and 
a particular age fixed on. Some old story might associate such 
relaxation of ordinary rules with a particular age, and bo give it 
a quasi-religious sanction. The rtvbs is possibly an indication 
that rjXLKia is not used in the ordinary sense of time of life, but 
in that of occasion, season ; cp., however, Symp. 206 c €7r€t8av eV 
TLVi rj\LKia yevwvrai. 

a 3. pk\pnr€p atSovs (Tiocfipovos Ikcuttwi/, " under the restraint 
of a clean-minded shame on the part of all." A a-uxfipcov alSios 
would admit of greater relaxation than an alSws of the wrong 
sort. Cp. Plut. Lye. ch. xiv. rj 8e yvfxvo)(TL<s twv TrapOevcov ov8(V 
al(T\phv €i\€V, alSovs p€v irapovcrrjs aK/3aa"tas 8' oiTrovo-rjs. — €Ka(rT(ov 
suggests that there might be some who would not be fit for such 
a function. — For the connexion of al8<i)s and (rw(f)po(rvvr) cp. 
Phaedr. 253 d Tiprjs e/aacrx'^s /xera (T(Dcf)po(rvv7)<s re Kat atSovs, 
and Charm. 160 e f. 

a 5. Tov<s Twv xopwv a/3>(ovTa? Kat vofxod€Ta<i : these would be 
the dyiovio-TLKTJ's dOXodkrat ol irepl ^(opwSiai/ mentioned above at 
764 e 2 ; vofxoOeras seems used here in the limited sense of 
dO\od€Ta<?. 

a 6. ocrov dv, " wherever," lit. " to whatever extent." — The 
Aldine rdrTovras looks simpler at first, but rdrrovres goes rather 
better with the neut. sing, oo-ov. (If rdfrovras be read it would 
seem better to put the comma after vopodkras instead of after 
vo/xo^vAa/ccov.) Schneider and Burnet are the only editors retain- 
ing the MS. text. (Schneider, and others, take vop^oOcras to be 
predicative, i.e. coupled by Kat. with eTn/xekrjTds and KocrfxrjTd^;.) — 
Aid. also changed the MS. 6(tov to ocrwv, but only the next three 
printed edd. followed him in this. — Is it possible that vopLoBkras 
is a mistake for dOX.od€Ta<s 1 

a 7. Ast would make oo-a a-fjuKpa kol TroAAa the direct obj. 

606 



772 3 THE LAWS OF PLATO 

of cKAetTreti/, but it is best to take otra ktX. closely with rotavTa 
Travra, and supply " aliquid " (Schn.) with iKXeiTrecv. 

b 2. Kar et'iavTov, " quotannis" strengthened and amplified by 
the det ; " in each succeeding year." 

b 4. €0)9 av 6po<5 ktX., " until the regulations for such proceed- 
ings shall seem to have been sufficiently defined." 

b 5. The MS. xo/aos for x/^^vos was very likely due to the 
opos in the preceding line. 

b 6. As no MS. has a possible reading, we shall do well to 
follow Schanz and Burnet in adopting what is by far the best 
of the conjectures in place of the ScKctTT^/ots of A and 0, i.e. 
Schneider's SeKaerrfpls. This, like the vulgate SeKaerrjpos, might 
be an adj., in which case the genitives dvcriMv and ■^(^opciajv 
would depend on e/xTrei/atas, but it is best to take it as a noun 
on which the two genitives depend directly : " a ten years' 
cycle of festal sacrifice and dance would be a reasonable and 
adequate period to assign " (lit. rax^et's is " if assigned ") " for 
each and all of the details." (Ast, holding that Trdvra koI eKacrra, 
and the lawgiver's enactments, both during and after the x/oo^o? 
rax^€i9, refer, not to lepd alone, but to all legislation, would reject 
the words dvcrtoiv re Kal xop^ttov ; but, as Eitter says (p. 171), 
the mention at d 2 of deojv /xavretas favours the general view that 
the whole passage refers to Upd alone. 

C 1. KOLvfj : i.e. in consultation with the lawgiver. 

C 2. €L(T(f)ep€iv here means " report." — rrjs avTtov d.p)(rj<;, " within 
the sphere of their office." 

C 3. eKacTOV : i.e. ck. to rrapaXemofxcvov. 

C 4. rov KttAws e^eipydcrOai depends on and explains tcAos. 

c 6. avTots : i.e. the various officials. 

C 7. " KaraXafifSdveiv proprie dicitur quicquid inopinatum et 
repentino quasi impetu nos deprehendit, et in universum quod 
improvisum nobis accidit," Ast. — irdcras . . . cTreA^ovras : IttcA- 
detv is used, I think, — as at 850 c 2 eireXOioi' Kal TreiVas t^v 
TToAtv — rather in the sense of consult^ lay a matter before, than in 
that of visit ; and so it governs dp^ds and Srjfxov as well as fxavreias. 
The x^P^^ dpxovT€s and the vo/xo<^uAaKes are to consult first the 
whole body of state officials, next the public assembly, and thirdly 
all the oracles. A single objection from any of these quarters is 
to be fatal to a project of change. 

d4. For KpaT€iv abs. in the sense of "to have the best of it " 
cp. Phaedr. 272 b 6 fxr] TrecOofxevos Kparel, and below 839 a 4 



and 6, Tim. 54 a. 



606 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 772 d 

d 5. After this important digression the Ath. resumes the 
thread broken at a 4. — Aid. (not Steph., as Stallb. says) altered 
the MS. oTTOTc into o-rrodev — an improvement in every respect ; 
cp. R&p. 362 b €7r€tTa ya/xctv oiroBiv av /SovXrjTai. — ttcvtc Kal 
iiKocTL. See note on 721 b 1. 

d 6. GTKOTrwv Kttt (TK07rovfjL€vos vtt' ttAAwv '. the occasion seems 
to be thought of as a quasi-medical examination of candidates for 
matrimony. At the same time in the Kara vovv eavrw we discern 
recognition of the part which personal preference may play in the 
matter. Cp. on 773 b 7. 

d 7. irpkirovra : cp. above on 771 e 3. (Heindorf quite un- 
necessarily conjectured irpkirov ri.) 

e 1. A has ras for 7ra9, and tQ>v for ercoi/ ; L and 0^ 
corrected the first mistake, and A^ the second. — nZv -n-kvre. : the 
article implies that this limit has been mentioned before ; cp. 
721 bl. 

e 2. (US, " quo pacto " (Fie). For the use of {Vyretv cp. 630 e. 

e 3. W9 <f)rj(rLv KAetvtas : cp. above, 723 d 5 ff. 

e 5. eAa/?6s re ktA. : it is not clear whether Cleinias means 
that the subject of marriage comes in aptly at the point where the 
Ath. has introduced it, or that marriage is a subject which will 
specially profit by a wise preamble ; probably the latter. 

e 6. Kttt emphasizes /xaA* ; so at 773 c 2 kol /xaAtcrTa. 

773 3< 1. Tovs . . . ya/xovs, " such marriages as commend them- 
selves to the wise." This matter is discussed in just the same sense 
at Polit. 310 bff. 

a 3. €av raAAa la-d(rj : i.e. if a man is hesitating between two 
choices, the only difference being that there is rather more money 
in one case than in the other, he should choose the poorer. — All 
through this disquisition it is the choice of the family into which 
to marry, rather than the choice of an individual bride which the 
speaker has in view. 

a 4. Tt/iwvTtt : used like our "prefer," in the sense of "choose." 
The participle contains the more significant idea : " prefer, when 
you marry," etc. Cp. Hipp. Mai. 303 e 2 ravras Trpo twv aAAwv 
TLfir}<ravTe<i. 

a 6. TO yap ofxaXov . . . Trph<s dper-qv, "for homogeneity and 
proportion are far superior to a state of excess." Here he is think- 
ing, not of the married pair, nor even of the families united 
by the match, but of the effect produced by various kinds of 
marriages on the state of society at large. If men always aim at 
marrying into richer families than their own, wealth will tend to 

607 



773 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

accumulate in a narrow area, and a similar excess of poverty will 
be found at the other end of the scale. 

a 7. In the same way endowments of mind and character must 
be tempered by the admixture of opposites, if the state is to be 
manned in a salutary fashion. (Plato would doubtless, in modern 
times, have counselled alliances between families of opposite 
political views.) 

b 5. fxvrj(TT€vu) ydfxov sounds like a poetical expression ; possibly 
it is a reminiscence of Eur, I. A. 847 /xvryorTevw ydfxovs ovk ovras 
(OS et^acriv. 

b 6. cfieperaL Se ttws ktA. : again it is the family with which 
the alliance is to be made, rather than the positive qualities of the 
particular bride or bridegroom, which are supposed to determine 
the choice. It does not seem to have occurred to Plato that 
personal inclination, if more play were allowed to it, might act in 
the same way as the counsels of oi e/x^poves. 

C 1. TpoTTOjv rjdecTLV : cp. 968 d 2 rpoiroiv -qdecrcv kol Wecnv. 

c 2. '))fj.iv is emphatic, " to us, the founders of this state," as 
opposed to Tats TrAetcrTats TroAeo-t. — Kal fxaXuTra : cp. koI fxdX.a at 
772 c 6. 

C 3. 8ta Aoyov, " expressly " (not " per rationem " as Fie). — 
vofjuo is an instrumental dat. (not " add to the law " as Jowett). 

C 7. yeAota qualifies the infinitives TrpocrTciTTeiy and dvayKct^etv. 
So at Xen. Mem. iv. 2. 32 kuI to vyiaLveiv Kal to vocretv . . . 
ayat/a av etrj. 

C 8. av eyei/jat (Ast) is better than av dveyeipai (Bekker) for 
the MS. **dveydpat. Both A and O have a blank space 
between 6vp.ov and eydpac, which may well have been filled with 
av, due to dittography of the first syllable of the already misread 
dv€y€Lpai. €y€Lp€Lv is far commoner in Plato than dveyeipetv, 
more particularly in the figurative sense — cp. Eep. 440 c 5 ovk 
kOkX^i TTpos rovTov avTov kyeip€(T$aL 6 dviios ', — The rare optative 
form in -at (cp. above 719 e 3) was not so unusual in Homer 
as in Attic prose, and was perhaps adopted here from a vague 
reminiscence of Homer's Tptucrtv Ov/xov eyei/aat, though the latter, 
like the Homeric /xevos cyetpetv (with dat.), is used, not in the 
sense of incense, but in that of " put heart into." — The early 
printed edd. insert Kat before 6vfxov dveyelpaL. 

d 1. SiK-qv Kparrjpos KeKpa/jLivrjv, " mixed after the fashion 
of a drinkers' bowl." — ov ktA., "in which the wine, when 
poured in, is hot to madness, but when chastened by another and 
a sober divinity, thanks to good company, yields a wholesome 

608 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 773(1 

and innocuoua beverage." — jxaLvofxevos is not merely an epithet 
of oLvo<i ; it is part of tlie predicate. — At An sent, etc. 792 b 
Plutarch paraphrases KoAa^o/xei^os by o-wcfipovL^eG-dai KoXa^o/xevov. 
Plutarch's comment at De aud. poet. 15 e illustrates dyaOov /cat 
fxerpLOv ; it is dcfiaLpeL yap rj Kpdcns rov oivov to /?Aa7rTov, 
ov crvvaipovcra to \py](TLjjiov. [F.H.D. cps. also Phil. 61 c 6.] To 
Athenaeus this passage is simply a "familiar quotation"; he 
applies it, in a manner quite inconsistent with its context, merely 
to enforce the precept ov xpV p-^Oveiv. [Longinus] Uepl vipovs says 
that in the judgement of many Plato's own style here needs the 
chastening of a " spirit of soberness " : vqif^ovra yap, (ftaort, Oeov to 
vSiop Aeyetv, Kokacrtv 8e tyjv KpdcrLV^ iroirjTov tlvo^ tw oun ov\i 
viq^ovro'i ka-n. 

d 5. eav fxkv vofno ra TOiavra dvayKalov : not " the law must 
leave such matters " (Jowett), nor even, as Schneider and Wagner, 
" we must omit such matters in our law " ; the following Se clause 
shows that we ought to supply TretpacrOat from it, and translate 
" (the wise man) must give up trying to attain such objects by law.'' 

d 6. €7r^8ovTa TTiideiv : so at 664 b 4 €7r^8etv is used of the 
persuasive power of fiova-iK-q ; similarly at 671 a 1 ewoiSov yiy- 
veorOai v€oi<s 7rpo<s dperi^v. Stallb. cps. 837 e 6 €7ra.8o)v TreiBnv, 
and 944 b 3 Toiavra TrapaixvOov/jievos cV^Setv, and Rep. 608 a 3 
(Tra8ovT€<s rjixiv avTOL<s rovTov rov Aoyov . . . kol ravrrjv t^v 
e7r(i)8rjv. 

d 7. TTju Twv 7raL8ii)V ofxaXorr^ra avTwv avT0L<; : above at b 7 
he said the state would be ill-balanced if some citizens were 
excessively rich while others were excessively poor ; here he 
points to the fear that the natures of the offspring would be 
one-sided if the temperaments of the parents both inclined towards 
the same extreme. There he was thinking of the external 
circumstances of the citizens ; here of the natures and tempera- 
ments of the children. It is not easy to determine whether ofx. 
avT. avT. means that the object which each single father (eKacrTov) 
must have in view is (1) the approximation of all citizens to a 
common type, (2) the resemblance of the man's own children to 
each other — so Wagner — or (3) the "equability" — so Schneider 
and Jowett — of each child's own temperament. The emphatic 
avToiv inclines me to the third interpretation. Schanz says A has 
auTois. 

e 1. Steph. was the first editor to print dTrXyjcTTov for the 
vox nihili aTrAeto-Tov of the MSS., though A^ and O''^ made the 
correction. — The insatiability of those who desire the wrong sort 

VOL. I 609 2 R 



773 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

of " equality " is, by a rhetorical figure, transferred to the equality 
itself. 

e 4. f^ia^pfxevov — which is a variety in expression for f^ia — is 
antithetic to 8t' ovetSovs ; like eTraSovra in d 6 it agrees with 
the subject of Tretpacr^at, on which airorpkireiv depends. (Schanz 
reads /Std^ecrdai ; Stallb, says f^ia^ofxevov " stands per anacoluthon " 
for the inf. ; while Ast compares it to idiomatic participles after 
verbs of saying and perceiving where we should expect an inf.) 

e 6. efjLTrpocrde : at 721 b 6 ff. Here we have a further 
glimpse into Plato's deepest thoughts on human destiny. There 
we read that ye^/ecrt?, the power of reproduction, gives the human 
race a hold on immortality ; here he says that yevecrt? provides 
for the continuous service of to ttolvtcdv apta-Tov (728 dl), the 
supreme object of worship, and implies that only those who serve 
the Highest get into touch with rrjs detyevovs <f)V(r€Ois — real, 
indestructible existence. Thus we are led on to that wonderful 
passage at 903 c, where we are told that every yevecrts fashions an 
instrument for helping to secure the felicity of the universe, and 
that the great mistake to which each insignificant mortal is liable 
is to fancy that the universe is made for him, and not he for it. 
— With Trj<s aetyei/ovs (fivoreojs dvr€\€(Tdat cp. above 721c 6 
dOavaa-La<s /xeTetAr/^ei/at, and Aristot. De an. 415 a 29 tVa tov del 
KOL TOV Beiov ixeT€\(D(rtv, fj SvvavTat. 

e 7. Steph. first corrected the MS. KaraXecTrovTi to the ace, 
though he left the dat. in his text. 

774 3»1- With virrjpkras dvd' avrov TrapaStSovat cp. 776 b 3 
KaSdrrep Xa/jLirdSa tov /3tov TrapaSiSovras aAAots €^ aAAcov, 
OepaTrevovras del deovs Kara voiJLOv<i. 

a 2. W9 XPV 7«,/^€tv : these words are difficult. Ficinus, misled 
either by his text or by his eye, seems to have joined them to the 
TTcpt ydfxojv in 773e5 ; for there his translation is : "ad nuptias 
igitur, ut decet, celebrandas " ; here it is merely " de nuptiis 
ineundis." Wagner takes (us to be how — going back, i.e., to the 
subject of the sort of marriage which is advisable — a subject 
discussed above at 773 a ff. — he would even read ov<s for ws. But 
the following threat of penalties upon obstinate bachelors is in 
favour of Schneider's and Jowett's view that w? is thatj and that 
the words mean " that marriage is a duty," and depend rather 
upon TT/ooot/zta^o/xevos than on eiTrot. I would suggest that it 
may have been a marginal heading which strayed into the text. 
Its place in Ficinus's translation gives some slight support to this 
view. 

610 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 774 a 

a 3. TrpooLixia^ofxevos opdois : not " if he makes a fitting pre- 
face " (as Serranus), but " by way of apposite preface." 

a 4. oLKOLvcjvrjTov does not denote merely the absence of the 
marriage tie ("alienus ab hoc consortio " Fie), but unsociable 
in character and behaviour ; for marriage is a duty to the state. 
The Kttt after exy is explanatory. 

a 6. €KaTov Spa^/xats : Clem. Alex. Strom, ii. 423 a, in de- 
scribing this law, calls the sum paid rpoi^-qv yvi/atKo?, and seems 
to say that there were magistrates' fees to be paid as well. In the 
Times of Nov. 21, 1911 it was stated that the Mecklenburg 
Provincial Diet had resolved to tax all bachelors over thirty who 
had no relatives dependent on them. They were to pay twenty- 
five per cent more than married men. Wives are evidently more 
expensive to keep nowadays than in Plato's time. 

b 4. TTcts : not, I think, every ra/xtas t-^s "H/aas (though the 
eKacrT0V5 at e 3 is somewhat in favour of that view), but every 
citizen. It was incumbent, i.e., on every citizen, if questioned at 
the evdvva of the magistrate concerned, to give evidence as to his 
own liability to the tax, and say whether he had paid it or not. 
(Herm; would read Tracrt — in the sense of tw jSovko/xcvoi (jxeruvai). 
He truly observes that it is superfluous, after stating the steward's 
liability, to say it applies to all stewards.) — eis, " in the matter of" ; 
so at 677 b 7, 775 a 7, 784 b 5, and 809 e 7. 

b 6. €K(i>v here is " if he can help it." 

b 7. fSoyjOeiTOi KOL dixvv€T(D, "must rise and defend" ; /Sorjdelv 
is " to take the field," " to be up in arms," and not, in itself, " to 
assist," as the dictionaries say. Cp. Thuc. v. 75. 1 rrjs Se fj-dx-qs 
fxekkoixrrjs 'icreaOai. . . . IIAeto-Toava^ . . . efSoyjO-qcre' Kal fJ'^XP'' 
fjL€V Teyeas a<^tK€TO, Trv^o/xevos Se tyjv vlktjv d7r€X(J^pr](r€. No 
doubt, in certain cases, when construed with a personal dat., it 
gets the meaning assist. So " to he out " for the Pretender is to 
assist the Pretender). 

C 3. Trporepov : i.e. at 742 c 2. 

C 3 flf. clp-qcrdo) 8e ttcxAiv ws i'cra dvrl icruyv ccttiv to p.-qre 
kafxfidvovTL p.rir' CKStSovTt 6ta xpr^jxaTinv aTroptav yrjpdcTKeiV Toy's 
Trevryras : at 733 b 5 tcra dvrl torwv was "in a case of equality"; 
here, with ia-TLv, it is "it is a case of equality," i.e. (with a 
negative in the following clause) " there is just as little probability 
one way as another." The proper object of €K8t8oi/Tt, and there- 
fore of \ap.f3dvovTi also, is a bride, not, as has generally been 
assumed, a dowry, as at d 2 and 742 c 2, we should in that case 
have StSdvTi. These datives are genitival, and go with dwopLav. 

611 



THE LAWS OF PLATO 

The negatives are difficult ; for they do not negative the particii)les 
so much as yrjpdcrKeLv. We may translate: "But I would return 
to the subject, and insist that there is no great probability that, on 
account of dearth of money, whether in the case of the bridegroom, 
or in that of the bride's father, the poor should fail to reach old 
age." The reason follows: "in our state there is no abject 
poverty." The early printed edd. turned to into tw, and so all 
subsequent edd. except Schanz and Burnet. Another alteration 
of this passage suggested in the margin of and the Florentine 
MSS. was the substitution of SiSaorKCiv for yrjpda-KCiv. Ficinus 
read yrjpda-Ketv. Ast and Stallb. welcome this change, and take 
8t8d(rK€Lv as an inf. with an imperative force : " we must teach the 
poor that it is as broad as it is long if a dowry is neither given 
nor received, all being equally poor," " propterea quod isto modo 
omnibus sit pecuniarum pecunia " Stallb. The following ydp 
clause does not in the least support a statement of this nature. 
Schneider and Schanz give the passage up and suppose a lacuna 
after eKStSovrt. Apelt proposes to read yepaipeiv for yrjpdcrKeiv^ 
retaining the unauthorized tw, and expressing doubt about the 
previous part of the sentence. His idea is that Plato is here 
urging us to pay respect to parents. 

C 6. vTrdpxovrd k(TTi stands for vivdp^^ei^ as at 903 c 4 rj 
virdpyovcra stands for vTrdp^rj. — The gen. after Tracrt is unusual ; 
Schanz emends it to roh. — It would be better to put a colon after 
TToAet ; what follows is a distinct reason for dispensing with 
dowries. 

c 7. v(Spi<i : Stallb. ad loc, and Bekker in the Excursus to the 
twelfth chapter of Gharicles have collected many passages from 
ancient writers illustrative of the airs and tyranny of the uxor dotata 
(aXoxos TToAvSw/aos). Even Justinian iii. 3 adopts Plato's 
arguments, speaking of dowries as "frena." The original reading 
in A and was v^pecs ; the correction made by A^ and 0^ to v/Spts 
has been universally adopted. Steph.'s y'jTTOJv for ^ttov has no 
MS. authority. The adverb fits both clauses better than the 
adj. ; especially as SovXcia has two adjs. already. Ficinus's minor 
is not conclusive for -r^TTiDv, though somewhat in its favour. 

d 2. eV Twv KaXiov Spi^rj tovt' av, " will so have one good deed 
to his credit." — rj : we should have expected an explanatory Kai 
instead of the first r|. This r/ is not or, but either, or whether. 
The early printed edd., not seeing this, coolly put in dX\' before 
it ; they also, de suo, changed the 8e before /xi/as to /xev. 
Contrary to his usual custom, Plato here begins the enumeration 

612 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 774 d 

of the four classes at the bottom. The sentence leaves several points 
unexpressed, and to be supplied from the context ; if all were 
there it would run : <6 /jt€i/> ttAcov . . . 6 5t <7rA€ov ■i^> /xvas 
<a^ia> ktX. 

d 4. 6 TO {ikyKTTov TLfxrj/xa KeKTrjfjievos : these words might 
well be marked off as a parenthesis. Their addition renders the 
corresponding additions in the previous clauses unnecessary. 
[F.H.D. suggests that the words are a commentator's " gloss."] 

d 5. oc^etAeTO) fiev tw Srj/xocrLa} : so L and ; it is doubtless 
the right reading. The scribes of these MSS., however, knew of a 
variant T(p 8u for tw SrjfxocrLoyj which variant is the text reading of 
A, which has the correct reading in a late hand in the margin. A 
further knows of a variant ocfiXtjcreL for o^etXeTco. — The author 
leaves us in some doubt as to the nature of the penalty. It is 
clear that the temple stewards concerned are to confiscate the 
surplus money or goods given with the bride ; but it is not stated 
whether one or both of the guilty parties — and if one which — is 
to pay the equivalent fine to the public exchequer. We may 
conclude that in case of a marriage between members of different 
property- classes the rate of the higher class would fix the amount. 

e 2. Trap' avT(j)v tKacrrovs, "each out of his own private store." 
This payment by the defaulting stewards would apparently go to 
the temple treasuries. — Stallb. cps. Plut. Solon ch. xx. twv 8' aAAcov 
yafi<ov a^eiAe ras <f>€pva<s, i/xciTta T/)ta, kol (TKevrj jxiKpov vo/At(r/jta- 
Tos a^ta K€Aevo"as, erepov Se firjSev, eTTLcfiepecrdat rrjv yafxovfjiivrjv. 
There probably the <f>€pvi^ was not the dowry in general, but only 
the trousseau. 

e 4. kyyvr]v : Herm. De vest p. 9 (note 25) notices that the two 
points in which Plato's law differs from that given at Dem. Contra 
Steph. p. 1134 are (1) that Plato characteristically admits relatives 
on the female side, and (2) mentions the gvayidfather as coming 
before the brother. — Steph. would write TrpcoTyjv for Trpiorov. The 
case is like that of ■^ttov at c 7 ; he has not here, however, any 
support from Ficinus, who has primum for tt/owtov, deinde for 
SevrepaVj tertia for rplr-qv. 

el. li and do not shape A's mistake of a-vfi/SaLveL for 
<rvix/3atvrj. 

e 8. Kvpiovs : the adj. can be applied, in a slightly different 
sense of course, to the people who are capable of making a " valid " 
betrothal. On the validity of the betrothal depended the 
legitimacy of the children of the marriage. 

e 9. For Trporkkua cp. schol. on Aristoph. Thesra.912 "Hpa reAeia 

613 



774 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Kat Zevs TcAetos eTi/xwvTo ev rots ya/xois ws TrpvToiveLS ovres* rtoi/ 
yafxiov • TcAos 8e 6 ya/xo§. 5to Kat TrpoTiXeia eKaAetro i^ dva-ia rj 
irpo rwi/ ya/zwv yiyvofikvy). See also Euhnken, I'imfs.v. — For the 
MS. r/ ns I think we ought to read r} rt's. oo-a and tis would 
'then both introduce interrogative sentences dependent in grammar 
on ipoiTojvTa. Stallb. wished to read y) €l tls. 

775^2^- T^^i'Oop.evov 6KeLV0L<s rjy'H(r6ai Travra eavrw fxerpiu)^ 
ytyvecrdaL, "and be quite satisfied to do as they tell him." — 
Tovs e^rjyrjTds : these officials have already been mentioned at 
759 cd. 

a 4. For the "absolute" irepi clause Stallb. cps. Phaedr. 250 c 8 
TTcpt 8e KaAAov? ktA. 

a 5. Ficinus unaccountably has ex latere paterno for what in our 
MS. text is cKarepwv ; so Serranus ex parte patris. 

a 7. €6s xpr)p,ard: cp. above on 774 b 4. — As at 774 d 4, the 
graduated arrangement of property-classes forms a framework 
which renders full expression of the points connected with each 
stage unnecessary ; rw /xeyto-ro) is loose for "the man of the highest 
class." 

a 8. €cf)€^rjs ovTO), KaOoLTrepj "just in series according as . . ." 

b 3. COS direipoKaXov re ovra kol aTratSevrov twv ircpl ras 
vv/JiffiLKds Movcras vofxiov : for the two ideas cp. Bep. 403 c 1 xpoyov 
(XTret/ooKaAfcas Kat dfiovcTLas vcfie^ovra. — For irept. c. gen. as a variant 
for a simple possessive genitive cp. above on 685 c 2. For the genitive 
after aTratSevro? cp. Rep. 619 d 3 ttovihv dyvfMvd(TTov<5. — I think 
Jowett is right, as against all other interpreters, in giving vopnov 
its technical musical sense. Laws are not things you are educated 
in ; music is. It may be said that " the laws of the hymeneal 
Muses" is itself a figurative expression for "a cultivated, liberal 
state of mind and feeling " ; but the Muses are not readily com- 
pared to legislators ; and the sense of strains or melodies, or 
harmonies fits the phrase better : " as a vulgar soul that is not 
attuned to the melodies of the Muse of marriage." 

b 4. The subject of excessive drinking comes in naturally on 
the mention of the wedding feast. 

b 6. ov5' acr^aAes, "besides, it is dangerous." — ovt ovv 6^ 
(coming after ovre dXXoSi ttov) is " above all " (it is out of place, 
and dangerous). — The MSS. of Athenaeus, who quotes this passage 
at x. 39, have ovS' aAAo^i, and ov8' dcr^aXks ; the Plato MSS. 
have ovre in both places. Dindorf corrected the first ov8k in 
Athenaeus, and Bekker the second ovVe in Plato. 

C 2. I am convinced that we ought to put a full stop after 

614 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 775 C 

/xeraAAaTToi/Ta?, and to treat ottws ytyvr^rat as an independent 
injunction, similar to the prohibitions treated of at Goodwin, 
M. and T.\ 283 {Prot. 313 c, Euthyd. 296 a. Charm. 157 b, Aristoph. 
Nub. 824, Dem. iv. 20 (p. 45). If it be held that only a future 
could be used in such a sentence when it is positive, we must 
suppose the clause to be an abrupt anacolutlion. A colon should 
follow /ACTo, $€ov. The whole passage — b 6 ovt' ovv . . . d 4 ttot 
av — is thus arranged, as to its main ideas : " To drink deep is 
especially wrong at one's wedding — is to cloud the mind at a crisis 
in one's life when above all the mind should be clear. Your 
possible offspring too will suffer in mind if your mind is cloudy 
when it is made. And its body will suffer too, from the relaxed 
state of your body. Both body and soul of the drunken man are 
at war each with itself, and offspring then generated will in all 
probability be perverse and crooked in body and mind." 

c 6. €v fjLOipa — "uti par est" (Schneider) — seems rather otiose. 
Cornarius — he was a doctor of medicine — plausibly suggests ev 
fj'yjTpa. for it. 

C 7. 6 Se Stwvwjuevos ktA., " why, when a man is in liquor, he 
drives and is himself driven all ways at once ; there is war in his 
body and in his soul : a drunken man must be but a staggering and 
fumbling sire, and produce ill-balanced and shifty offspring, whose 
minds are probably as crooked as their bodies." 

d 4 f . fiakXov fx€v introduces the two higher, fxaXia-ra Se the 
indispensable lower, and 8ia(f)ep6vT(DS 8e the lowest possible of the 
requirements. 

d 8. €^oixopyvv/i€vov kKTviroxKrOai : both words are probably 
middle, and have as their object " the faults just spoken of." We 
are told by the scholiast on this passage, and by Timaeus in his 
Lex., that e^o/xo/jyi/v/xevo? has the same meaning as e/c^arTo/xcvos — 
Tim. adds dirorvTrov/jidvos ; i.e. it probably was used as a technical 
term of the sculptor's art in the sense of to mould a likeness. At 
Eur. Bacch. 344 firjS' e^ofiop^et fiiopiav rrjv crrjv €/xot; the 
metaphor is still perhaps that of the coming off of colour from one 
contiguous surface to another. Cp. also Aristoph. Ach. 843. 

e 1. TravTYj, " in every respect " — whether in body or mind. — 
cfiavXoTepa: not "worse than their parents," but " sadly inferior 
creatures." 

e 2. <ipxi y^P '^^^ deh<i iv dvOpioTTOLS ISpvfxevrj ^^C'^' Travra, 
"men recognize in all beginnings a divinity of universal efficacy, 
if etc." — lit. " beginning, set up as a very deity among men, makes 
all right." This is the third handling of this theme in the sixth 

615 



775 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

book. At 753 e 8 we were told that the proverb dpxrj yjfXLa-v 
TravTos did not honour dpx-^ as highly as it deserved, and again at 
765 e 3 the significance and importance of 7} Trpiorr) pXaa-r-q — " the 
seeds and weak beginnings" Hen. IV. Part 2, iii. 1. 85 — was 
eloquently described. — Ast suggests that Kai may be a misreading 
of the tachygraphical sign for (09. This would give us an easier 
sentence, but we are not driven to this assumption — still less to 
Schanz's athetesis of kol ^eds : the emphasizing Kai and the abrupt 
identification of dpxq with the divine power seem not out of place 
in such a striking sentence. Probably Schanz, like Stallb., took 
the ^eds to be the deity mentioned at c 4 — /xera Qeov. d.p\r] (tm^€l 
irdvra was very likely a proverbial saying. (Apelt holds Kai Oeos 
to be a mistake for Kar cdos, and translates Kar' Wos ISpvfxevr), 
" der sich durch Gewohnheit fest eingewurzelt hat." But does not 
this make the following if clause superfluous ? dpx'q cannot gain 
a firm footing unless it is duly honoured.) 

e 3. ISpvfjiivrj : ISpvcrOaL is the regular word for the establish- 
ment of a divinity. 

e 5. raiv OLKiaLv : the Svo oiK'qa-ei'i belonging to each kA^/)os 
mentioned at 745 e 4. 

776 a 1. j/eoTTcuv : there is here none of the disapproval which 
was implied in the use of this" metaphor at Rep. 548 a, where he 
speaks of wedded homes as are^^i/ws veorrta^ tSias. 

a 2. \<j)pia-dkvTa is the most significant verb in this passage. 
The motive for this separation from the paternal home is explained 
by the following yap clause, and its necessity is again urged at 
a 7 ff . vofxta-avra is subordinate to yuipicrdkvra ; the re, inserted 
after the latter word in Aid. and the next three printed texts, 
obscures the true significance of yuypto-OkvTa. (Ritter p. 405 
suggests that perhaps vofxixravra efvat stands for vop^t^ecv.) 

a 5. KaraKOyorys Se . . . Tr\ri(r/JLovrjs, " while a companionship 
which is too close, and which misses the desire begotten by long 
absence, makes (the same natures) fall apart from sheer satiety (of 
companionship)." 

b 1. Plato does not seem to have used eTrtcr kottclv elsewhere in 
the sense of visit. 

b 3. Kaddirep Xa/xTrdSa tov fStov TrapaStSovras aXkots i^ aAAwv : 
Boeckh p. 140, among other instances in which Lucr. " colorem 
duxit a Platonicis," compares this passage with De rerum 
nat. ii. 78 : 

Inque brevi spatio rautautur saecla animantum 
Et quasi cursores vitai lampada tradunt. 

616 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 776 b 

For the Aa/x7ra8r^<^o/3ia, or Aa/xTra?, as it was also called, cp. Hdt. 
viiL 98, Rep. 328 with Adam's note. 

b 4. With dipair^vovTas ad ^eovs cp. above 774 a 1 aei tw ^ew 
V7rrjp€Tas dvO avTov Tra/aaStSovat. 

b 6. All subsequent editors have rightly adopted Ast's correction 

of the MS. KiKTrjTO to K€KTlJTO. TOt /X€V OVV TToAAtt . . . AcyO- 

/Aeva, " Of the majority (of such belongings) it is as easy to 
give an account as to get possession of them ; but slaves are 
a difficulty every way " (i.e. it is difficult to get possession of them, 
and difficult to give directions about them). " And the reason is, 
that we say things about slaves which are partly right and partly 
wrong ; for we contradict experience of their serviceableness as 
well as follow its teaching in the form which our very language 
takes about them " ; in other words, " our very language about 
slaves is inconsistent, and our experience shows a similar diversity 
and contradiction." This enigmatical sentence naturally brings 
from the downright Megillus a request for further explanation. 
"Do we?" he says; "what do you mean?" At c 6 ff. the Ath. 
admits the obscurity of his remark, and then explains that he 
meant that about any known system of slave-holding you will 
find a bewildering diversity of opinion ; more particularly that, 
though we all know cases where slaves have been more to their 
masters than even brothers or sons, we sometimes talk of them as 
if they were good-for-nothing : — e.g. you find Homer saying that 
by divine ordinance slavery is essentially degrading to the slave. 
(Susemihl takes )(^peLai to be " our needs," and tries to get from 
the words the meaning "sometimes we speak of slaves as if they 
were the reverse of useful to us, and sometimes as if they were 
useful " ; but, as Ritter says, even if the words could be made to 
mean this — which they cannot — that would be no reason (atrtov) 
for the difficulty of the subject. Ritter himself construes havria 
. . . /cat Ta Xeyofxeva " for according to the way we treat them, 
slaves show characteristics that are the opposite of each other, and 
in accordance with the way in which we treat them, we also mould 
our judgement about slaves." This general conclusion harmonizes 
well with the following remarks of the Ath. about the treatment 
of slaves, but ignores entirely the manifest opposition between 
tvavTLa Tais ;(petats and Kara ra? ^eias.) 

C 3. The rd which was left out in A is supplied by an early 
hand in the margin, and is present in 0, though rd Aeyo/xeva is 
in an erasure ; it seems as if in the original of both there was 
some indistinctness about the rd. 

617 



776 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

C 7. TTOLVToyv T. ' E. I the gen. goes with the superlative TrXdcrrriv, 
and is like that of the idiomatic dvOpioTrtov — " in the world " — 
with a superlative. It is equivalent to " throughout the whole of 
Greece"; cp. Prot. 342 a 7 cf)L\ocro(f)La yap kcniv TraXaiorarrf re 
Koi TrXeiCTTrj tojv *EXAi^v(ov ev KpqTrj t€ Kal AaKcSat/iovi, and 
Laches 197 d 4. 

C 9. "^^ ' H/oaKAtWTWv SovXeta rrjs twv MaptavSvi/wv Kara- 
Soi'Xoxrews, " the slavery-system of Heraclea under which the 
Mariandyni are held in serfdom." This is (nearly) Stallbaum's 
interpretation, and is right, I think, as against Ruhnken's view 
— adopted by Liddell & Scott — that SovXeta is " abstract for 
^ concrete " — as in the next case cited — and stands for body of slaves. 
R. is however right, as against Stallb., in taking /caTaSovAwo-ews to 
be a genitive of definition (cp. on 723 d 6), rather than a genitive of 
origin. — For the relation of the Mariandyni to the people of Heraclea 
Pontica, Ast and Stallb. refer, among other authors, to Strabo 
xii. 3. 41, p. 817. Athenaeus vi. 263 ef. and 264 a f. gives 
authorities for regarding the servitude of the Mariandyni and 
Penestae as the result of voluntary compacts. 

d 4. o 8r) . . . ToSe kcrriv : an abrupt explanatory asyndeton. 
— irapi^v Ti^ '^oyw, "in the course of my argument" — lit. "as I 
passed along it in my ai-gument." 

d 5. t(r/x€v . . . dpta-Tovs : in other words, we all admit the 
possibility of slaves being capable and well-disposed. The yap in 
d 7 is " why ! " or " you know," rather than " for." 

d 8. It would be interesting to know whether has any trace 
of the senseless dislocation of letters by which A arrived at 
yevofX€voL(r etrw Kaa-tv. (A new collation of the now recovered O 
would be of great value.) 

e 4. With TovvavTiov we must supply either Aeycrat, or icrfxev 
Xeyojxevov. 

e 5. Tw yei/et is sufficiently defined by the 8ovXi]s in the pre- 
ceding line. Ast wanted to insert tovto), and Stallb. tcov SovAwv 
before yevei. 

e 6. Kal direcfyijvaTO, " explicitly declares " ; the Kai emphasizes 
the verb. 

777 a 1. For the variety of reading see scholia and notes on 
Od. xvii. 322 f. re voov . . . dvSpojv sounds more like Homer 
than T dperrjs . . . dv€po<s, and gets some confirmation from the 
dv^/awTTwv . . . voov eyvw in a 3. — The first hands in A and 
thoughtlessly wrote d-Trafxet /Serai ; L and A^ and 0^ have 
a7rayu.€t/3€Tat. 

618 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 777 a 

a 3. Tavra Syj SiaXafSovTe^; iKaaroL rots Siavorj/xacTLv, "between 
tliese two views a man decides for himself." 

a 4. Kara Se Orjpibiv (f)V(TLv : " as if they were dealing with 
brute beasts." 

a 5. ov T/36S [xovov aAAa 7roAA,aKts . . . SovAa? : cp. Phit. 
Lye. ch. xxviii. wcrre tov? Acyoi/ras, ev AaKeSaifxovt kol tov 
ekivdepov fxaXiGrra kXivdepov elvai kol tov Sovkou p.aXi(TTa SovAov, 
ov cfiavXw? TeOeuiprjKevaL rrjv ^la^opav. 

1)2. KTTJo-ews : like KT-^aaa-daL at 776 b 7 — which referred 
by implication to slaves — this word denotes not so much the 
acquiring as the form of possession — in other words, the legal 
position of the slave with regard to his master. 

b 5 f . 0. Apelt's suggestion that we ought to read ea-rt tl 
Opcfifxa for ia-TL to dpeixfxa seems, at first sight, to improve the 
construction, but if we are to make evxprja-rov predicate to the 
subject " man," it will be hard to justify the gender, if avOpwrros 
alone is the subject, whereas it is quite in order if to Opcfifia 
avOpioTTos is the subject. I think Burnet is right in leaving the 
MS. reading untouched. Most recent editors (Stallb., Wagner, 
Ziirr., Herm., Schanz) follow Ast in reading WcXec for e^cAetv, 
and assigning (^atvcTat to Cleinias. This makes Plato say : "It 
is clear that because man is a ' difficult creature ' to deal with, 
therefore he is wont to be difficult in a particular case." The MS. 
reading says : " because he is difficult (in general), and particularly 
in the relations of master and servant, the servant question is 
bound to be an awkward one." This suits the argument at least 
as well as the former, to say nothing of the awkwardness of the 
asyndeton after (^atvcTat in the former arrangement. — dvayKaiav, 
" inevitable." — Plato is probably not thinking solely of the dis- 
inclination to serve, but also of the possible failure of the capacity 
to rule. It will be remembered that in the Republic he is anxious 
to provide means for removing from a lower or a higher class in 
the community individual members who were manifestly out of 
place. He hints here, rather than expresses, the view that the 
difficulty has its source in the diversities of a nature which refuses 
to be forced into our artificial categories : — that the source of 
much trouble caused by slave-holding is that some slaves were 
better than their masters, and some masters only fit to be slaves. 

C 1. The yap introduces confirmation of the ovSafxws €V)(^p7ja-Tov 
rather than of the xaXerrov. 

C 3. €K /xtas (fiiovr^s, " eiusdem linguae," Ficinus. 

C 4. If the Ttt, which alone omits, is correct, it stands for 

619 



777 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

Trepl TO, ktX. — the Trept being naturally left out in view of 
the Trept in the following line ; it is easily supplied from the 
preceding Trepl ras, and Trept ye rag. If the to, be rejected, the 
construction must be Kal ocra crvixf^aLvet TrepiSivoiV . . . epya Kal 
TraO-QfiaTa. — For irepi^LVdiv (so a late hand in A and for 
TrepiSeLvuyv) the scholiast in A, and Hesych. 8.v., give the interpre- 
tation TreiparOiv. 

C 5 f . Athenaeus and Stobaeus have TravroSaTrwi/, clearly an 
error. — The MS. kAottwv', which Naber would reject, Burnet 
well emends to kAcottcov. In A the o is in an erasure. We may 
translate : " History has repeatedly shown (how many troubles 
result from this source) in the case of the frequent revolts wont 
to be made by the Messenians, and in that of the states which 
own many dependents of the same race ; and again in the case 
of the multifarious robberies and adventures of the so-called 
' Rovers ' of the Italian shore." It is implied that these Italian 
pirates had once been held in subjection as slaves. The people in 
that part of the world have always taken naturally to brigandage. 
— Stobaeus has doubtless preserved the correct reading in av 
Trai/ra, where all other texts have aTravra. Cp. Adam on Rejp. 
437 b : "I have noted the — certain or probable — omission of av 
in all or the best MSS. in Phaedo 62 c, 109 e, Euthyd. 291 e(?), 
Rep. 457 d, 516 e, 558 d, where the omission is lipographical ; also 
in Phaedo 72 b, Euthyd. 281c, Grat. 389 e, 409 a, Ale. I. 132 b, 
133 e, Soph. 266 a, Phil. 47 b, Hipp. Mai. 295 a." — This sentence 
is a curious — perhaps we may say careless — repetition of the ets a 
Kal Trdvra ra TOiavra (iKkxpavTa^ ktX. at 776 d 2. 

C 7. 8vo 8rj XeLTrecrdov /xova) />tr/_)(ava, " all I can find to 
recommend by way of policy is these two things." 

C 8. Tovs /xeAAovra? paov SovXevcreLV, " if they are to bear the 
yoke easily." — The Grammarians quoted in Stallb.'s note tell us 
(1) that TrarpLWTrjs was used in the sense of o-v/>t7raTpiwTry9, just 
as TToAtTT/s is used for crv/xTroAtTr/s, and (2) that ttoXityis 
would be used for a free Greek, TrarpnoTrjs for a slave or a 
barbarian. 

d 2. /MYj fjLovov . . . TT/aoTt/xtovras, " paying them attention, not 
merely on their account, but still more on their own." TrpoTLfxav, 
as at 770 d 7, is not used in the sense of prefer, but is merely a 
stronger rijxav. With avrwv we must supply evcKa from the former 
part of the sentence. 

d 3. 17 he Tpo<f)r) TMv Totovrwv, "the proper way to treat 
men in that position is . . ." 

620 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 777 d 

d 4. el SvvaTov marks the statement as something of a paradox ; 
aSiKta is, of course, never allowable. The following yap clause sets 
the precept in its right light. The justice which shows itself 
when there is no compulsion^ must be genuine, and is therefore 
admirable. 

d 7. 6 irepl TO, Twv SovXojv rjdrj kol ir/aa^ei? stands for 6 Trcpl 
TO, irepl Twv 8ov\u)v r). k. tt. Schneider is, so far as I know, the only 
interpreter who takes these words in the right way ; all others 
content themselves with the reproduction of Ficinus's senseless 
"circa mores actionesque servorum." -qOrj kol Tr/aa^cts is fairly 
rendered by the English behaviour — " the man who shows himself 
free from all taint of wickedness and oppression in his behaviour 
towards his slaves." 

e 1. (TTrctpetv ei? dpeTrjs 'eK(fiV(rLV (iKavwraros) must be a poetical 
quotation ; " ad producendas virtutis fruges aptissimus " Fie. Cp. 
Cymbeline iv. ii. 180, "valour | that wildly grows in them, but 
yields a crop | as if it had been sow'd." The poetical a/xcai/ros 
was doubtless part of the same passage. It reads like a bit of 
Pindar. 

e 2. etVeii/ opdm a/xa Aeyovra, " to say, and with truth." 
" Rhetoribus tritum est dicere etTretv Aeywi/, €(firj ttov Aeycoi/ " 
Lobeck on Soph. Aj. 757. 

e 3. /cat is " or," and iracrav " any kind of." — Here, as in the 
injunction at 729 b, ala-xvvea-OaL tov^s veovs, we come very near 
to chivalrous and even Christian sentiment. 

e 4. Trpo^ da-O. €av. does not go with SvvacTTevovTL — that would 
be tautological — but with etTreiv — " to declare in the case of any 
superior with reference to his inferior." Cp. the note on tt/oos at 
778 a 2. 

e 5. The 5' dec of A and is a peculiarly senseless reproduction 
of a scribe's error, due to the dittography of the A of Set If it 
had not been for the quotations in Ath. and Stob. we should no 
doubt have acquiesced in the vulgate del. — kol firj ktA., " instead 
of debauching them by mere admonitions such as we should use to 
our equals." — Aristotle at Pol. i. 1260 b 5 directly contradicts 
Plato on this and the following point. 

778 a 1. Trdcrav, " pure and simple." 

a 2. a S-Q, " whereby " ; a curious adverbial neuter plural — 
something like to 8e used for " whereas." Nearly the same a 8ry 
occurs at Phaedr. 244 d 6 (possibly in a poetic quotation), at Soph. 
Aj. 1043 (Lobeck's note), Dem, Epist. 1490, and stands for are 
5^ or Ota 8rj. — irpos SovXovs is the greatest difficulty ; it seems 

621 



778 a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

to be used " pregnantly," in the sense of " in their treatment of 
slaves." Cp. on 777 e 4 ; the sense is helped by the previous irpos 
in Trpocnrat^ovTas. 

a 3. The active OpvirrovTes is manifestly used in the sense of the 
previous OpvirTecrdai Trotelv, and we must supply avrovs, or, better, 
Tov fScov, from the context, as its object, ap^ecrdat and apyeiv 
are somewhat irregularly epexegetic of x^-^^^rtore/joK (Schneider 
takes a to be directly governed by 6pv7rTovT€<s — " cujusmodi deliciis 
multi admodum stulte in servos utentes.") | We may translate : 
" whereby, in their treatment of slaves, many people, most 
unwisely, in bringing over-refinement into their life, make it 
harder both for the slaves as slaves, and for themselves as masters." 

a 7. ore Tfc? . . . KaT€(TK€va(Tix€vos . . . €.1X1 . . . ^p'j : an 
unusual construction — the indefinite ore eiT] for the simple temporal 
ore k(TTi or orav fj. It is as if we should say as often as, in the 
place of as soon as ever; the ews eurj at Theaet. 155 a 4, where the 
apodosis is (f>'qa-op€v av yevecrOai, is somewhat analogous, but less 
extraordinary. I think it possible that Plato wrote XPV^ — ^ 
" ]3hilosophic " imperfect ; if so, the opt. would be more regular. 

b 2 f . TYjv . . . ttoXlv €7nixe\-qT€ov etVat : for the ace. of the 
agent with a neut. verbal adj. cp. 643 a 6 and 688 e 5. 

b 3. Trepi, T€ tepa kol re'iyy] : I think interpreters are wrong in 
treating these words as if they were irepl rd re Upa Kai to, T€i)(r) ; 
i.e. re is not hot\ but and. ircpl l. Kal r. are a variety of expression 
for Twv i€pu)v KOL T€i\oiVj and as such are coupled by t€ with 
TovTwv. What Plato says is that the virgin city's task is to go 
into all details of city architecture, "and (more particularly) the 
details of the structure of the temples and the city walls." That 
is to say, he does not here limit the question to the consideration 
of temples and walls alone. It is only at vvv 6e povov in c 1 that 
he lets us know that the subject of city architecture is not to be 
treated at length. 

b 4. -^v : a variety of the " philosophic " imperfect ; " really, 
properly, came before . . ." He goes on to explain that, though 
in reality the houses would have to be built before the family life 
was begun, in a disquisition on the subject we may arrange matters 
in the reverse order, if we like. 

b 5. The subject to ycyveTac is ttoAis (understood). — Xoyo) is a 
repetition of the Aoyw at a 10. — kol paX' eyxiopet, "it is perfectly 
legitimate " — the strengthened pdXa. 

b 7. eav Oeos eOeXr} : as at 632 e 7 this is added, by way of 
"make-believe," about a topic which will not be found in the 

622 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 778 b 

Laws. We never get tlie details referred to as iravra ra to lavTa. 
— 1^87; TOT€, "at last," for the more usual rore -qSrj, as at Theaet. 
165 e 3. — 67rt, "on the top of," "after." 

C 1. vvv Se fiovov ocrov riva tvttov : the adversative 8e refers to 
the statement (rvfXTrda-rjs t^§ olKo8oiJiiKyj<; eVi/xeAryTeov rtva rpoirov 
iKaa-ra e^et, which has in a way been " resumed " in the words 

TTadLV TOtS TOtOVTOtS. 

c 4-d 3. These directions for temple-building are obscure, and 
in parts the text is corrupt. In the first sentence I follow Ast in 
making rrkpi^ govern both Trao-av t^v ayopav and tt^v TroAti/ oXrjv : 
tlie re and Kat poiirt to this ; besides, the question of the position 
of the city as a whole — which other interpreters suppose here 
indicated — is foreign to our present subject, and has been dealt 
with to some extent at the beginning of Bk. IV. ; moreover, the 
expression Trpos rois vxf'rjXoJs rwv towwv denotes not one site, but 
several. The second division of the passage, which is hopeless 
as it stands, I would propose to reconstruct as follows : (1) For 
BiKa(TT7jpL(jiv read SiKacrT'qpia, and (2) reject the second SiKaa-T-qpta 
€v oh — that in d 2 — as an accidental repetition of the ^iKaa-r-qpia 
€v oh at c 7. Possibly it was originally a marginal correction of 
the erroneous SLKaa-rrjpLwv iv oh ; perhaps it caught the scribe's 
eye in a moment of vacuity. "We may translate : " The temples 
we must build not only all round the Agora, but also in all 
directions about the city, on elevated spots, for the sake of both 
security and cleanliness ; and adjoining them magistrates' quarters, 
and courts of law, in which judgements will be pronounced and 
received as on holy ground, partly because they are on solemn 
subjects, partly because the buildings are the abodes of solemn 
deities ; and in these buildings trials for murder would fittingly 
be held, and for all such offences as are punishable by death." 
[F.H.D. would reject Kal kv rovroL<; SiKatrrT^/ota.] 

C 8 f. ra /x€v . . . ISpv/xara : this is difficult. I think we 
should put a colon after ISpvpara, and take the full expression 
of the thought to be to. yu.ev tus ocriiov irepi €to"tv at SiKat, to. Se Kat 
(US TOtovTcov Oeiov ISpvfjLaTd iariv ra Upd. 

d 1. TOLOVTiDl/ = OCTiiDV. 

d 5. The author of Ilepl v^ov% § 4, who couples this metaphor 
with KVTrapLTTLvas pvrjfjia<s (741 c), as instances of to xj/vxpov, reads 
€7ravi(TTacrOaL ; he also has eyw ^vfjL(f>€potp,7]V av rfj ^Trdprrj — 
evidently quoting from memory. , 

d 6. KaAcos ix€v Kal 6 TrotT^rtK^s vTrkp avTWV Aoyos v/xvetrai, 
" I quite a^ree for one thing " (/x€v) " with the poet's often quoted 

623 



778 d THE LAWS OF PLATO 

words in which he tellfc us." — The author and poem are unknown. 
— Here again Aristotle disputes Plato's judgement : at Pol. 
1330 b 32 he says wepl Se reixiovy ol fii] (jida-Kovres Seiv t'xftv to,? 
T^S aperrjs avTLiroiovfJLevas TroAets Atav dp)(atO}S v7roAa/x/?ayovcrtv, 
— The fxkv Kai marks the first of the two reasons given as sub- 
ordinate in importance to the second, which is introduced by 

8 . . . €TL TrpoS TOVTOLS. 

e 1. yrjLva : not necessarily of earth — or even of brick. He 
uses this word rather than XtOiva because of the previous 
€v Trj yfj KaTaK€L/x€va. The substance of the " earth " in Greece is 
rock, and the walls dug out of the earth would be walls of stone. 
Ast quotes the orator Lycurgus {Adv. Leocr. 153) dAAa Trjv fx€v 
avTiov auSpeiav acrc^aAecTTepav (jyvXaKrjv elvat vofJiL^ovT€<s rcov 
Xidiviiiv TreptySoAwv. Plut. Lye. ch. xix. represents the legislator 
Lycurgus as saying, " ovk dv fx-q dT€i\i(rro^ iroAts arts dv^pdcn 
Kol ov TrXivdois €(Tr€(fidviOTai." Here ttXlvSoi means blocks of 
stone. — TO rjfxerepov is a periphrasis for rjjx€LS. 

e 2. TO kut' evtavTov pikv eKTrefnreiv eis rryv yjiypav rev's veovs : 
the reference is to the tasks proposed at 760 e 6 ff. for the 
dypovofxoL ; the /xev corresponds to the Se at e 6, where the con- 
struction goes on as if we had el jj,€v eK7r€/x7rot/x€v here. 

e 5. (d)^ 8rj . . . OVK eacrovras kirifSaiveiVy " with the manifest 
intention of keeping them out of the country." 

e 6. Steph. would substitute ci for Se, and Wagner supports 
€6 by the argument that it is not the mission of the ay/oovo/xot, 
but the building of the walls that is said to be " ridiculous." But 
what Plato says is ridiculous is the inconsistency between the two 
actions, and that is exactly expressed by the fikv and 8k. 

e 7. Ast is certainly right in taking tt/oo? to be an adverb. 
(Stallb. would have us couple Tr/aos fxaXdaKrjv e^tv ttoulv in the 
sense of " conduce to effeminacy.") 

e 8. TrpoKaXovfxevov ktX., " a city-wall incites men to run 
inside it instead of facing the foe, and instead of seeking safety 
by ensuring that some of them are vigilant night and day, to 
fancy that the real way to be safe is to shut oneself up and go 
fast asleep inside walls — as if men were meant for inactivity ! 
Such men don't know that real ease and rest is what comes after 
toil : — what is more, I can tell them that ease and rest of the 
disgraceful kind, which is nothing but laziness, inevitably pro- 
duces toil and trouble in its turn." 

.779^^' The close coupling of KaOevSovras with (j>pa\6kvra<i 
by T€ /cat is a humorous touch, as if npt to &g wide awake 

624 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 779 a 

{<f>povpeLV vvKT(op) but to go fast asleep were the right way to 
protect oneself. 

a 6. With Tr]V pacTTiovTjv cos oi'Ttos ((ttIv €k Twi' TToviDV, where 
the ovTtus marks the expression as proverbial, we may compare 
2 Henry IV. v. iv. 28, " Well, of sufferance comes ease." 

a 7. oTpai is a gentle expletive ; Wagner's " nach meiner 
Meinung" makes too much of it, and too little of the strength 
of the opinion here expressed. — koi is explanatory. (The early 
printed texts altered paOvjxias to padvp^iai^ an erroneous assimila- 
tion like that of StKacrT'ijpLa to SLKaa-rypiiov at 778 c 7.) 

a 8. TrdXiv : whereas the natural order is from toil and trouble 
to rest, an unnatural propensity to rest first will work the reverse 
tvay, and lead from rest to toil and trouble. — Jowett's " a renewal 
of trouble " introduces a wrong notion. — tl, " for any reason." 

b 2. ISdXX.€cr6ai : used (in the middle) like the Lat. iacere 
(Jundamenta, muros). 

b 3. o/AaAoTT^Tt T€ KoX ojxoLOTTjo'Lv '. instrumental datives 
describing the way in which security was to be gained. The 
houses were to be built on the same plan, and of the same size, 
so that they would fit together and present an impregnable front to 
the outer world. (Ficinus took the two datives with the previous 
clause — as if these characteristics made the city " one continuous 
wall.") — €is ras oSovs : this arrangement of the houses was 
apparently not to be confined to those on the edge of the city. 
The 6S0L would cut the town up into blocks enclosed in con- 
tinuous walls, 

b 6. Sid(f>opo<i : superior, that is, in safety, to an arrangement 
which would expose each house to be attacked on all sides. 

b 7. MSS. €ws OLV p.€v >/ ; Schneider corrected p.€v y to p^vy, 
but, as Ritter says, ews av p.evr} is unintelligible. Burnet has 
doubtless restored the correct reading by the suggestion that the 
first letter of the MS. ecus is due to dittography of the e of 8c. — 
I think it is possible that we ought to remove the comma after Se 
and make Tovnov depend on to. oLKoSop^i^devra. 

C 1 f . Ktti, " even to the extent of." ^■qpiovvra'^ is subordinate 
to 7r/50(rai/ayKa^oi/Tas, indicating the means of compulsion. 

C 4. Twi/ Trjs TrdAcws . . . cTrtAr^^erat, " encroach on public 
property " (Jowett). It is possible that the words mean " interfere 
with the plan of the city." 

C 7. olKilvy as Ast and Stallb. say, is administrare. (Ritter 
follows Susemihl in taking ocra . . . irpkirov av olkcIv etrj to mean 
" which sites it would be proper to occupy with buildings " — lit. 
VOL. I 625 2 8 



779 C THE LAWS OF PLATO 

" inhabit." His objection that the province of the ao-rwo/zot did 
not extend outside the city-walls would apply still more to his own 
interpretation. Such matters, however, as e.g. the introduction of 
water-courses, and the places where the country roads were to enter 
the city, were naturally the concern of the city authorities.) 
[F.H.D. and A.M. A. suggest that ocra may be oVa vSara.] — 
o-vviSovTes rats ^/attats : ravTa iroivTa is not directly governed by 
crvvi86vT€s, but by iTrtvofioOeTovvTOiv ; the dat. xpeiats is governed 
by the crvv- in crvviSovTes, " considering them in the light of 
experience" — "usudocti" Fie. — "usu cognita" Schn. — There is 
some analogy in construction with 965 b 10 irpos €K€lvo crvv- 
rd^aarOai Travra cwo/atovra ; there Travra is directly governed by 
o-vvTOL^acrdaL. 

d 2. Sl' aTvoptav : there are many such points which the 
statutory law is incapable of foreseeing. — ore, " now that." 

d 4. 7r€/ot/xevet, " are ready for." 

d 8. ecTTwcrav yeyovore? : so at 736 b 7 ecrro) crv/x^c/^T^Kvia, 
where there was the same invitation to imagine that a certain stage 
had been reached ; cp. too 712 a 4. 

d 9. Siaira : rather vitae spatium (Schn.) than vivendi regula 
(Fie.) ; r/v in the next line is temporal, like rrjv rjfiepav at 780 a 4. 

e 2. 8iaif)€pov(Trj ecrofiivr) : this, and wv Stacficpoiv at 963 b 5, 
may, as Stallb. says, be added to Person's list in his note on Hec. 
358 beginning "Kara participii substantivi cum alio participio 
conjunctio." — Schneider, Zurr., Herm., Wagner, and Schanz all 
follow Bekker in printing a mark of interrogation after ea-ofxcvy. 
The early edd. up to Steph. put a full stop after it. Ficinus, 
however, had already seen that riva t/dottov )(^pr) (rjv depends on 
etTretv. Ast (in his text), Stallb., and Burnet rightly follow 
Ficinus, and Burnet makes the construction rather more clear by 
marking off to 8r) . . . k\6[xevov (which Fie. neglects altogether) 
as a parenthesis. This parenthesis means : " the natural sequel to 
our previous injunctions" — the injunctions, i.e., given above and 
interrupted at 776 b 5, on the subject of choice of a wife, and the 
marriage ceremony. The above-mentioned majority of interpreters 
take Twv vvv clpTjfxevtav to be the immediately preceding words. 
But why should Plato call the problem that faces him one that 
springs from the previous one, when it is the previous one — the 
question, i.e., how the married pair are to spend the first year of 
married life? 

e 4. roLovTiov : i.e. SvctkoXiov or Si'd^x^/owv, which is the 
equivalent of the ironical ov Travrtov evKoXioTarov. 

626 



NOTES TO BOOK VI . 780 a 

780 a 2. Fahse proj^osed to alter TrpaTTovras to raTTovras ; but 
we want Tr/oaTToi'ras to govern ra Sr]fi6(rLa Kal Koivd more than 
we want something for ttyj xpv Cl^ ^^ depend on ; for this depends 
very easily, as a Trpo? to en] /xaivo fxevov construction, on TroAccrtv 
diro(f>aLV€(TdaL vo/jlovs. Ast finds a reason for raTTOvra? in the 
fact that ra Srjfxocna koI Kotvd go with (yjv below at a 6. Rather 
sliould we see in the explicit construction at a 2 — as the MSS. 
have it — an excuse for the looser construction when the phrase is 
afterwards repeated. 

a 3. Ast, comparing Phaedo 64 e 1 KaO' oa-ov fxrj ttoXXyj dvdyKrj 
fxerex^i'V avTOJVj thinks a fx-q has fallen out before dvdyK-q here ; 
but this would suggest that the legislator in question did conceive 
that there might be cases where private life ought to be interfered 
with, and that is just what Plato at a 5 says he does not. Schneider 
takes o(rov dvdyKrj to be " as far as necessity goes " ; his transla- 
tion is "privata vero ab omni necessitate liberanda," and so 
Wagner — "insoweit die Nothwendigkeit in Betracht komme." — A 
further difficulty arises about twv lSl(dv : does it (as neuter) depend 
on dvdyKrj, or is rcov l8l(dv (vofiiov) governed by Seiv ? I think it 
is best to follow Schneider, and to take the genitive with dvdyKrj : "so 
far as compulsion in private life goes." (Apelt p. 1 2 would read 

dv dpxrj for dvdyKrj — " whatever rules over private life." — Ast, 
who keeps a store of prepositions up his sleeve for use in such cases, 
says ra Srjfioa-ia " est " Kara rd 5r;/x6crta, and rwv lSlcov " est " irepl 
tCjv i8t(ov.) [F.H.D. would make tojv 18l(dv (neut.) depend on 
ocrov.j 

a 4. The Sclv in a 5 goes with elvai as well as with yiyvicrdai. 
— irdvra : i.e. both public and private life. 

a 6. rd ye KOLvd Kal Srjixocna : an irregular sort of ace. of inner 
object. See above on a 2. — WeX-qcreLv, "will be likely to"; or 
perhaps " will be willing to." In either case the implication is 
that, if the one province is left unregulated, lawlessness is likely to 
invade the other as well. (Cp. below d 7.) — avTov<s is the same 
avTov? as at a 2, i.e. rov^ TroAtras. (Schneider takes it to be 
emphatic : " ipsos sua sponte usuros legibus.") 

a 8. 8La(f)€p6vT(j}<s : Ficinus, Schneider, and Wagner are wrong, 
I think, in taking this to be aliter. Plato seems always to use the 
word in the sense of either " specially," or " more," never in that of 
*' otherwise." — In the two passages cited in L. & S. for the meaning 
differently from, it certainly means more (than). — Here fxrjScv 
8La<f)€p6vT(i)s jirj8e -^ttov is used like our " neither more nor less," 
in the sense of "just as much." (Those who make Sta^cpovTcos 

VOL. I 627 2 s 2 



78oa • THE LAWS OF PLATO 

mean aliter do not take it with €v a-vcrcrLrioLS, only with r7]v ScaiTav 
TroutaOai. Besides doing violence to Sia^e/oovTco?, this enlargement 
of the reference to life in general is quite out of place ; the following 
context shows that the crvcrcrLTia alone are in question here. — tovto 
in b 2 is the institution of the avcra-tTLa.) 

b 2. Tov . . . xpovov : by brachylogy for 17 ev rw . . . ;(/oova). 

b 3. Oavfiao-rhv 6v : i.e. to the rest of Greece. — (Ast would^ 
reject ov as due to dittography of the last syllable of davfxacrTov^ 
supplying ijv as the verb ; but the anacoluthon in the Se in b 7 is 
natural in a conversational style.) — Kar' apx^-'i irpiorov : a pleonasm 
of the same nature as Kara Svva/jLiv otl fidXiarra. — Trap' vplv : i.e. 
in the countries of both his hearers. 

b 4. vofxoOeTetv: used figuratively, like our "dictate" ; when the 
verb is repeated below at c 6 it is used in its natural sense. The 
first institutor was not a real lawgiver, but a special need — at e 2 
he calls it a providential one — the implication being that no 
human lawgiver could have ventured to enforce such a custom. 

b5f. v/xiv, from b 4, has to be supplied in thought with 
vofxodery](TavTos, and with this v/jllv k\op.kvois agrees ; the words 
€v 6\iyavdp(i)7rtaLs and vtto 7roWrj<s aTroplas describe two attendant 
circumstances which conspired to compel the adoption of crvcro-iTLa : 
(1) the population was small, and (2) it was threatened by a 
great danger. (A.M.A. cps. the " National " or " Communal 
Kitchens " started during the war.) 

c 1. Schanz suggests that possibly we ought to read ifiepeiv for 
8ta^e/3€tv. 

C 2. iTTLTrjSeviiia : as at 638 c 2, " practice." 

'c4-dl. "What I wanted to explain was, that, though this 
institution was once viewed with amazement, and was one which 
no lawgiver would have dared to impose on people, to-day there 
would be no such difficulty in the way of the lawgiver who wanted 
to enact it. But that which is the logical con,sequence of this insti- 
tution, a thing which, like the former (re), is by nature adapted 
to succeed if tried, and which, because it is tried nowhere, as good 
as makes the lawgiver, as the saying is, card his wool into the 
fire and lose his labour in countless other such ways — this is one 
which it is neither easy to propose, nor for the proposer to put 
in practice." 

c 7. The T€ after Trec^vKos and that after vvv seem right 
enough, and there is no need to change the second into Se with 
Hermann (followed by Stallb., Bdh., Wagn., and Schanz) ; but I 
think that Badham is certainly right jn removing the comma 

628 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 780 C 

after the second ytyi/o/xevov and the t€ after oXiyov. It is not 
the institution in question that makes the legislator's work fruit- 
less, but the fact that the institution is nowhere adopted. The re 
after vvv connects the first ytyvofxevov with ttolovv, to which the 
second ytyvo/Acvov is subordinate. — There are two spheres where 
" law and order " (d 5) ought to Ije introduced ; its absence in the 
second vitiates its action in the first. This is explained in what 
follows. — Another conjecture I would unhesitatingly accept in 
this passage is Ast's change of iroiovvra to Trovovvra. He cps. 
Rep. 486 c dvovqra 8rj ttovmv. — dvrjvvTa is an adverb. 

C 8. " The phrase to twv Trai^ovrtov in Plato seems always to 
mean " as they say in the proverb " or " proverbial saying." 
Adam on Rep. 422 e. 

d 3. oLTTOKveLv i this word reminds us of Socrates's expressions 
of reluctance to deal with the regulation of the position of women 
at the beginning of Bk. V. of the Republic. 

d 4. olkovolt' dv . . . fJLaTrjv, " I will explain, for fear that 
this very subject may involve us in much useless discussion." 
(Fic.j Ast {Lex.)y and Schneider take ^larpL^r^ to be simply delay : 
" ne frustra in hoc ipso diu vos teneam," Schneider.) 

d 6. Twv Se draKTOiv . . . dXXa erepa, "while most of what 
is unregulated or ill-regulated weakens the effect of something 
else that is well regulated." 

d 8. aAAa €T€/)a, " others besides " ; a tautological expression — 
something like our "safe and sound" — sufficiently familiar to be 
used where the sense of rhythm demands weight of phrase. Cp. 
Eur. Or. 345 oTkov aAAov erepov 17 rhv aTrh Bcoyoviov ya/xa>v, 
Suppl. 573 TToAAovs erXrjv Srj \aTepovs dXXovs ttovovs, Dem. De 
Rhod. lib. p. 198 Kwv kol 'PoSov Kal aAAas crepas ttoAcis *EA- 
XrjviSas, Plato, Grat. 438 d 4 oi5 yap ttov Itti ovofxard ye erepa aAAa 
ToiJT(i)v, and Laws 875d7, 894 e 5, and 933 e 6 (ace. to the MS. 
reading). — ov 8rj kol vvv €<f)€(TTrjK€v Trept to Aeyo/xevov, " it is 
just as an instance of this that the subject under discussion now 
presents itself to us." A partial analogy to this is presented by 
Arist. Metaph. ii. 999 a 24 diropia . . . irepl ^<5 6 Aoyos ecfiecrTrjKe 
vvv; cp. also Arist. Pol. 1287 a 1. t^ Xeyo/xevov then would be 
the position of women, and the whole sentence would mean, " the 
position of women is a case in point." (It must be admitted that 
this explanation is somewhat strained. If we could be bold enough 
to adopt Badham's rather violent change (p. 20) of Trept to ireipa, 
all difficulty of interpretation would vanish : " and we have in 
this very thing a case in point, as the saying is." — It would also 

629 



78od THE LAWS OF PLATO 

be perhaps too bold to imagine the existence of such a phrase as 
Trepl TovTov i(f)€(rTrjK€v in the sense of " that is the matter in 
hand " — (cfiea-TrjKev being impersonal. — Ast, Schn., and Wagner 
take €cf)e(rTrjK€ — here, and perhaps in the Aristotelian passage as 
well — to mean "*s at a standstills^ ; but, though kTna-rrjvai can 
certainly mean " to halt," " to come to a stop," it is doubtful 
whether the perf. was used in the sense ot" " to stand still " ; 
besides, it is not clear that there is any halt in the discussion. — 
TO X^yo^evov^ ace. to these interpreters, is oratio nostra. [F.H.D. 
agrees with Ast and Schneider.] 

e 1. oTrep elirov : i.e. at 780 b 3. — davixaa-Tm is not admirably 
(Fie, Jowett and others), but " to the world's astonishment," 
" extraordinarily." 

781 a 1. dvofxGOerrjTov ixeSelrai : the expression suggests that 
a charge of undue licence might be brought against the Spartan 
and Cretan women ; and this seems to have been the case if we 
may trust EurijDides (Androm. 595 ff.). Stallb. cps. Hoeckh, De Greta 
ins. iii. 124. — ei's to ^oj? T^KTat : a poetical expression, used as 
at Prot. 320 d, Theaet. 157 d, Tim. 91 d. Laws 869 c, Rep. 461c 
in the sense of " has come into being," " has been created " — <^w? 
being " Z^7e " as at Soph. Phil. 415 ws fxr^Kkr ovra Kelvov kv ^aet 
voei ; whereas below, at c 6, as above at 722 e, and at Parm. 128 e, 
Phaedr. 261 e, c^wg is used for ^^ publicity." Here, however, as 
in some of the other instances where (f>(jjs means life, the secondary 
sense of exposure to mens gaze is suggested as well. 

a 2. aAA,' o : the MSS. and the early printed texts read aXXo, 
and some of them not only accepted the asyndeton, and slurred 
over the aAAws, but treated dv9p(x)7roiv as if it were dvSpiov. 
Steph. was the first to see the true reading, though he printed 
aXXo in his text : tovto in a 4 is the antecedent to this o. — /cat 
dXXiDS here =" to begin with"; we may transl, : "No; just that 
part of our human race which was, to begin with, clandestine and 
stealthy, as the result of its weakness — I mean the female sex — 
has most unwisely been suffered by the lawgiver to be free from 
law, because to bring it under law was hard." 

a 3. The comparatives stand for strengthened positives ; for 
the pLoiXXov thus used see on 729 e 7. — For €7riKAo7ra»Te/oov thus 
applied cp. Hes. Op. 67 and 78 (cv 8' irtOcL crTrjOecrcrt) \pev8ed 6' 
alp^vXiovs T€ Xoyovs Kal cTrtKAoTrov '^dos — of the first woman. 

a 5. et^avTo? Tov vop^odkrov : cp. Arist. Pol. ii. 1270 a 6 
Tcts Se yvvaiKas ^aat pXv dyeiv €7rL)(eLprj(raL rov AvKovpyov vtto 
Tov<5 vojxov<5j (OS S' dvT€Kpovov, aTTOcrTT^vttt TraAtv. — Sia 8e tovtov 

630 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 781 a 

fjLcdeLfievov ... 7) ra vuv, " and, owing to your neglect of this sex, 
you lost control of much which would have been in a far better 
condition, if it had come under the Law, than it is now." 
The early texts, down to Ast, had Trapa ppel, and this seems to 
have been Ficinus's reading — unless indeed, like Stallb., he 
took irapcppei to be from Trapkppia ; he also seems to have read 
riplv for vplv. He translated : "hoc enim praetermisso multa nobis 
corrumpuntur." L. & S. can hardly be right in giving irapcppei 
vfxlv here the meaning ■" slipped from your memory " ; it is rather 
" slipped from you," " got out of your control," but not as much 
as Schneider's " depravata sunV^ vp.iv — not ly/xtv — is cleaily right ; 
the Ath. does not conceive that any state could have taken in 
hand the regulation of the private life of women, which had not 
already dealt with that of men. 

a 7-b 4. TO (in b 1) does not go directly with irepiopiopevov (as 
Stallb.) but with -jrepl rots yvvaiKas ; to Trepl Tcts yvvaiKa^, as above 
at 780 e 2, is a variety of to tmv yvvaiKWj/, and is a periphrasis 
for " the female sex." — The argument, rather fancifully thrown 
into a mathematical form, is this : " it might be thought that, as 
won^en are the lialf of the race, the effect of leaving them un- 
regulated by law would be half as much as the effect of leaving 
the whole race unregulated ; but it is not so, because their 
tendencies to evil are greater than those of men — so much so that 
the residt would be more than twice as much mischief as would 
have resulted from so leaving men alone ; — so that rjpicrv and 
hiTrXacTLov do not apply to the same quantity : the former is half the 
mischief which would be effected by the whole race, if unregulated ; 
the latter the double of the harm which either half would do if 
they had been equally bad." — d.Kocrp'qTW's Trepiopoipevov is " under 
a laissez-faire regime" lit. " passed over on the principle of non- 
intervention." (Ast would read aKoa-prjrov^ taking rh ir. t. y. 
aKoa-prjTOv to be ^'pravitas muliehris" and translating Trepto/). by 'S'i 
legibus non coerceretur." Stallb. cites from Gramm. in Bekker, Anecd. 
i p. 369 (XTaKTcus as an explanation of aKoa-p-qTw^ — which not 
only confirms the adv. but shows that Ast has taken both olk. and 
TTcpiop. wrongly. — Stallb., who takes to Trepiopiopevov as the 
subject of rjpL(Tv ecmv, has to supply auTO as the subject of 

b 4. €7ravaX.af3dvy " revise." 

b 6 ff . ovTOis qualifies ov8apu)s evTv\o)s ; he has told us at 
780 (b 4 and) e 2 that the syssitia owed their existence to a happy 
chance, and a providential interposition. No such chance has 

631 



78ib THE LAWS OF PLATO 

intervened to lead men to the kindred reform now advocated ; 
instead of tliat there is a likelihood that its proposer would be 
thought mad — at all events (y') in states which have no syssitia 
for men. 

elf. avaatTLa . . . 6e6oy/x€va Kara ttoAiv etvat, " that sys- 
sitia are a recognized civic institution." — virdpyjei is impersonal. 

C 2. TTodev, as at Gorg. 471 d and Symp. 172 c, means "how 
is it possible that . . . ? " — '^py^j " '^^ *"^ti^ lif^, as we know it in 
Greece," as contrasted with the theoretical considerations in which the 
political and social systems of the Laws are founded — referred to 
at d 3 f. in the words Xoyov y' evena. 

C 3. yvvaiKas TrpoafSid^eordat rrjv cr. k. tt. dvaXoiaiv (f^avepdv 
deiopeicrdai : an awkward sentence : " to force upon women their 
consumption of food and drink's being publicly viewed." The 
ace. c. inf. clause is a sort of secondary object to Tr/aocr^ia^eo-^at, 
like ravTa in ov 8ei ravra Trpoo-jSid^ea-Oai at Crat. 410 a 7. 
(Stallb. translates yvvaiKas Trpoa-^id^eo-Oat . . . dvdXwa-tv by 
" Dculieres cogere ad . . . consumptionem" supplying oicrre before 
(fiavepdv Oeio peter 6 at. Ast is said to have suggested — I cannot find 
where — that TroLov/xevas has fallen out before Oeoipelordai. Badham 
would change yvvalKas to yvvatKiov.) 

C 5. xakeiviiirepov : adv., " more reluctantly." 

C 6. SeSvKos : cp. Rep. 579 b KaraSeSvKws Se kv tyJ OLKta to, 
TToXXd ws yvvrj ^y. by a common mistake has ScSolkos, and 
this is the reading of the early printed texts, up to Ast, and of 
Ficinus, who translates timide. H. Steph. from a comparison of 
Rep. 579 b conjectured KaraSe^vKos. — ayo/xevov : conative ; "when 
the attempt is made to drag her." — Ast would reject the 8' after 
this word ; H. Richards would change it to Srj. 

C 7. Tracrav, like Trda-rjs at d 2, all kinds of. — iroXv Kparrja-eLy 
" will be far too strong for." 

d 1. tovt' : i.e. to yevos, " this sex."' — oirep which is Bekker's 
correction of the MS. olirep^ certainly makes better sense than either 
the vulgate yirep or Stallb.'s ovirep ; it would refer to b 8. At the 
same time, the vulgate >;7r€/), which Schn., Ziirr., and Herm. retain, 
is possible, and accounts better for the MS. olirep. Stallb.'s ovirep 
would mean " (in the other places) to which I referred " ; but he 
had not definitely referred to any particular states which had no 
syssitia. — otjSc . . . rov Xoyov . . rbv opdov prjOevTUj " not even 
the mention of the correct view." 

d 3. el Si] SoKet ktX. : a practical application of the principle 
enunciated above at 739. If the circumstances of the case render 

632 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 78 1 d 

the theoretically besi impi'acticable, the philosopher is even willing 
to sacrifice theoretical completeness, and leave the subject alone. 
" If you wish our discussion! of politics as a whole to attain its 
end, as far as theory goes, 1 alirt q|uite willing to give reasons for 
thinking my view good and fitting, provided you like to listen to 
them ; if you don't, I will drop the subject. "-^Fahse aild Ast 
would, very plausibly, read areAy/ for drvx^- Ast thinks that 
Picinus read (XTekrj because he translates the word by manca. This 
does not follow ; e.g. at Crat. 420 c 7 he translates arv^ta by 
" defectus quidam consequendi impos." {drvx'js means unsuccessful as 
well as unfortunate. The Ath. means " if you have it at heart to 
make our talk a success." — Aoyov y eVeKa is contrasted with the 
epyo) at c 2. (Stallb., Wagner, and Jowett take el SoKet . . . toi/ 
Aoyov y€V€(rOai to be " if it is your opinion that the discussion has 
been etc.") 

d 9. dviiiOkv TToOev €7ri\€ipeLv, " to be starting from a long way 
back." eTTLx^LpeLv is used absolutely, in the sense of proceed^ take 
u particular line in an argument or investigation. 

e 2. With TTOLVTr) 7rdvTio<s, which occurs below at 801 a 1, cp. 
p.rj8afjirj /xrySaytxco? above at 778 a 1. 

e5. With Bk. III. begins the investigation of the true nature 
and correct form of the TroAtreta, and so he refers to what comes 
at the beginning of that book as rd irpajra Xe\6kvra. We are not 
bound to suppose that when these words were written the treatise 
actually began at Bk. III. 

e 6. i)(p6vos: and \pri are both such common words that they 
are likely to have been signified occasionally by their first two 
letters. This would account for the fact that A has xpovov where 
L and (though in an erasure) and the margin of A have the 
correct xp-q. Schanz thinks the mistake due to a misreading of 
an original xpeiav. 

782 a 2. As TO irapdirav qualified ciAry^^ev and €^€t, so Travrws 
qualifies both rjv and ccrrat. — r] pj-rJKos n , . . dv ei-q, " or else a 
space of time since its beginning — since it came into being — 
must have lasted an immeasurable age." A very awkwardly con- 
structed sentence ; it is doubtful if it is Greek. It looks like 
the " conflation " of two modes of expressing the same thing ; 
fortunately there is no doubt what it means — i.e. that if the 
time of the world's existence is not infinite, at all events it is 
unthinkably long. [F.H.D. would asterisk /ai^kos ti Trjs dp^rjs 
•as spurious or hopelessly corrupt] 

a 5. eViTi^Sev/xaTa means practices, courses, measures adapted to 

633 



7B2a THE LAWS OF PLATO 

influence character or habits ; ra^ews and ara^ms are qualifying, 
adjectival genitives. We may perhaps render : " regimes of all 
kinds, some strict, some lax." eTriTT/Sei'/xara dra^ias is almost 
an oxymoron ; it seems to mean nothing more than " the principle 
of laissez-faire.'^ 

a 6. Kol /3po)(T€Oi^ was rejected by Ast, and /3p. was emended to 
a/3p6r7]Tos by Orelli, and to ly/xepwcrews by Hermann. Wagner 
would change /^ptu/xarwv to 8o)/xdro)v. Schanz follows Ast. 
Though it is difficult I prefer the MS. reading. I would put 
a comma after f^pcocrecos and supply Travrola eTrtTr/Sev/xara with 
it, taking the words to mean " various fashions of feeding oneself" 
The counterpart to this is a variety of taste in articles of food, and 
that is the variety next mentioned. I even think that the intro- 
duction of the second variety — by a dfia — would be too abrupt 
without the preceding Kal /3p(x>a€0)s. We shall see presently why 
he brings in the bodily appetites. (Cp. on d 7 below.) 

b 1. avTwv is " of their previous selves" i.e. " of their natures." 

b 5. The Ttva indicates that the Ath. does not insist on the 
historical truth of the myth of Triptolemus ; someone, at all 
events, at some time introduced corn as a new food, 

b 6. Many edd. have adopted Ald.'s unnecessary change of fxr] 
to fMTjSe. — The article with XP'^^V after w is peculiar ; I think 
we ought to read ttw for the MS. tw. — As at 780 b 6 and e 1 (see 
Burnet's notes), the margin, by fxav, shows what the original scribe's 
mistake for /xwv had been. 

C 1. The argument is that the survival of human sacrifices 
proves the existence of cannibalism in the past. Further, the 
Orphic vegetarianism and the Orphic, sacrificial offerings, on the 
other hand, are indications of very opposite feelings as to methods 
of feeding, and tastes in food, thus establishing the appositeness of 
the Travrola, and TravToSaird at a 6 and 7. 

C 3. For 0T€ cp. Porson's note on oTord* ore at Eur. Hec. 110. 
— Schanz's cTdAyawv /xev is clearly a better correction than 
Stallb.'s erokjxMv for the MS. eroA/xw/xev. The Se after TreXavot 
corresponds to the /xev after iToXfioiv ; there is an erasure over the 
o of €ToA/xd>/>tev in A. — The order is, as usual, chiastic ; food, 
sacrifices : sacrifices, food. 

c 5. dyvd is, so to sj^eak, in quotation-marks ; as if he had 
.did "in Orphic language, pure." Cp. Horace, A.P. 392 victu 
foedo deterruit Orpheus ; foedo being used, in the technical 
Orphic sense, for all animal food ; not, as Orelli, '' the food of 
beasts," nor, as others "cannibalism." 

634 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 7^2 C 

C 7. 'Op(fitKOi TLV€<s Aeyd/xei/ot f^toi ey. rjfi. tols tot€, " what is 
generally spoken of as the Orphic rule of life was followed by our 
race in those days." The rjfxwv emphasizes the unity of human 
nature in all ages ; the intimation is that modes of thought and 
taste which had once existed could quite possibly be recalled.^ 

C 8. €Xo/x€i/ot, as the direct opposite of aTretxovTo and aTrexo- 
fxevot, is "insisting on" — Schneider sectantes ; they made it part 
of their religion to eat what was not animal. 

d 2. a T : MSS. Bekker's rejection of the a gives us on'the 
whole a better sentence than either Steph.'s a y' or Winckelmanns 
aTT or Stalb.'s arr. The dittography of the a is more likely to 
have happened than the corruption of y to t . — There remains, 
however, rather a superfluity of conjunctions ; the first Kai 
merely emphasizes (T(f)68pa. — kol acjioBpa Xeyofxeva, " what is very 
widely current." 

d 7. It is implied, though not said, that ra tovtols e^yjs — the 
next step in his train of thought — would explain why the 
preceding one had been taken. As at 781 d 9, the Ath. shows 
a consciousness that the order of his mental processes is somewhat 
obscure. It has been suggested above that the Spartan and 
Cretan institution of the syssitia points the way by which a 
complete regulation of the home and family life may be secured in 
the interests of the state. The Ath. next turns to consider the 
things in human nature which want regulating. These turn out 
to be the natural appetites, which, in certain aspects, may become, 
or be attended by, voa-jfj.ara (783 a 4). His solution is that all 
these appetites must be enlisted in the service of the community : 
otherwise there will be moral disease. 

d 10. XP^^^'^ '^^^ kiriOviJiias : a hendiadys, " imperative desire" ; 
i.e. desire whose satisfaction is a necessity of existence. — Travra rots 
dvOpcoTTois r]pT7)pixkva €k . . . means that these three desires are 
the cardinal factors in human nature — the two first, in its indi- 
vidual, the last in its racial aspect. 

d 11. As in 728 c 4 with o re tv\u}v kol fxrj Tvy)(^dviov, so 
here the variety between ayo/xevots and axOeicnv seems to have 
no special significance, but to be due to a desire for variety in sound 
and rhythm. 

e 2. rfv irkpi airacrav, like Trepl a^ravTa ravra at e 5, stands for 
a simple genitive ; here it depends on e/awra, there on iTndv/xLas. 

e 3. 'ifjLcfiVTov, like crvfMcfiVTov at 771 b 7, is instinctive. — fxea-rov 
OLCTTpov Koi avrfKova-rias rov A., like the v/3p€L irXeia-rr) at a 3 
IdcIow, suggests the lines along which the possessors of these cardinal 

635 



782 e THE LAWS OF PLATO 

instincts may be KaKws ayo/xevoi — in which case they become 
vocT'qjxara. — OLcrrpov re Kal avrjKova-rta'i : a hendiadys again, 
'frenzied rebellion." 

e 5. airoirXripovvTa : this constrnction supposes that a riva is 
the subject to TrpaTreiv. 

e 6. XvTvt-fs : this is the way desire works — by 'pain which craves 
alleviation. Seiv might no doubt be dispensed with, but it is more 
like an author's than a scribe's pleonasm. I am much attracted 
by Apelt's suggestion (p. 12) that dei Seiv — coming as it does after 
a final s — is a scribe's error for o-TrevSetv. crTrevStov, he notices, is 
just so used at Timaeus 86 c 1, in a passage very like this. — o-</)as 
is the pleasures and desires which are thus half personified — an 
unusual use of the pronoun. 

783 a 3. vfSpeL TrXetcTTr) Kao/xei/os, " a reckless, wanton flame 
of passion." 

a 4-b 1. a 8r] . . . kirippo-qv : (1) I think the object to be sup- 
plied in thought with rpeTrovra — which, and not the -rrpkirovra of 
L, I assume to be the right reading — is not the vocnqfiara^ but the 
people who are liable to them — i.e. the possessors of the appetites — 
the avTols of 782 d 11, who were to be rightly guided. (2) Ritter 
glances at the possibility that, though the restraints are said to be 
three^ the Ath. is really thinking of only two — i.e. the terrors of the 
law (cp. d 6 aTreiA^^crovTes rwrtv vo/xot?), and the sort of persuasion 
used in the TrpooLfxta which accompany the laws ; but he is right, 
I think, in rejecting this idea, and regarding vofxos here as force of 
habit. (3) I think it probable that crfSevvvvTwv is a scribe's 
error, and that the Aldine and Vulgate cr/^evvvvai is the correct 
reading. The scribe probably did not intend it (as Stallb. and 
Herm.) for a gen. abs., but for an imperative, forgetting the 
previous construction. (As to the possibility of such a gen. abs. 
cp. on 755 d 6 above.) (Steph. may be right in reading rpeTrovraSy 
though the change of number is common in Plato in such cases, 
and the sing, is attested by the variant Trpkirovra.) " In dealing 
with these three dangerous impulses, we must guide men's eyes, 
" beyond what is called delight, towards their true advantage, and 
must try, on the one hand, to restrain the dangerous tendencies 
by the three most potent influences of fear^ hahit, and philosophy ; 
and on the other, by calling in the aid of Music and Gymnastics, 
to quench their fire and allay the fury of their onset." — The 
fievTOi in a 7 corresponds to the /x€v in a 5, thus adding, it 
seems to me, to the confirmation of the reading crfSevvvvai. — 
Ritter is right in saying that ayiavioicn is almost predicative ; no 

636 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 

special presiding gods are meant, but the gods generally, in 
their capacity of patrons of gymnastic contests. 

In the last few pages of this book we seem to have detached sug- 
gestions of lines of argument, which a final revision would have re- 
arranged and worked up into a consecutive exposition. The chief 
points in it are : (1) The danger of leaving human nature to itself; 

(2) the great possibilities in the way of moulding human nature ; 

(3) the mistake of confounding acquired habits and prejudices with 
laws of nature. The passage from TratSwv 8e 87^ in b 2 to KaAws in 
d 4 occurs in L, but was originally absent from A and 0. It 
begins in much the same way as Bk. VII. begins ; this fact, and 
the detachment of the passage, are further indications that this 
part of the treatise has not received its final ordering. 

b 2. diofxev is used of the arrangement of topics in their imaginaiy 
legislation. 

b 5. We are bound, I think, to accept the reading rjviKa 
dcf)LK6fjieOa, though, as the text stands, it appears inexplicable. I 
would suggest that the corruption lies in the MSS. els to e/jiTrpocrdev. 
This phrase is common, especially with Trpoievat — e.g. above, 755 b 4 
7rpo'i6yT(DV twv vojxwv el<s TovfjLTrpocrOiv — and the neighbourhood of 
TrpoLovTiov here may have influenced the scribe ; but the phrase 
will not fit either Trepalvoiro av or -qviKa dcfiiKo/xeOa. I would 
substitute ws for ets, and take ws as the correlative of the ovtco 
in b 3 : " while the discussion advances on the same lines as 
it did when we came on the subject of the syssitia before, 
possibly our full tale of regulations will be made up." The way 
the subject was reached above was through the question (779 d 5) 
" what has the legislator to say to men and women after they are 
married ? " — I would, with Burnet, accept Ritter's arrangement of 
Ttts TotaijTas . . . KaToipofxeOa as a parenthesis. (One Florentine 
MS. and most of the early texts read tVa kol d(f)iK6p,€voL ets for rjvtKa 
dcfuKOfieOa, and this reading is retained by Stallb. and Herm. 
Schneider reads ore for o re, dc^cKw/xe^a for dt^LKOfxeda, and (like 
Ziirr.) retains the spurious ets before rds. Schanz abandons the 
passage as hopeless.) 

b 8. The second great difiiculty in this passage is the interpre- 
tation of rd T€ eTTiTrpocrSev . . . eTTLTrpocrdev Trotrja-ofxeda. iiri- 
Trpocrdev iroula-dai occurs above at 648 d in the sense of ohtendere. 
The T€ seems to point back to the re in o re vo/xo? at b 4. If so, 
avTaji/ may stand for vo/xwi/, but more likely for tCjv crvor(TLTL(DVj 
and TO. €TrL7rpo(rd€v avriov are " the necessary steps leading up to 
them," which are to be made into screens, or defences, set up in 

637 



783 a 



783 b THE LAWS OF PLATO 

front of them. " And the preliminaries to the syssitia, which are 
(equally) unregulated at present, we will reduce to order, and 
place before them as a screen or shelter." The upshot of the 
passage then is this : "at the present stage of our inquiry we must 
be content to reserve the details of the regulation of private life, 
but I want you to remember what I said about the three cardinal 
impulses of human nature, for that is important." 

C 2. vvvSij : i.e. at b 5 ff. 

d 2. All recent editors except Schneider accept Steph.'s insertion 
of &v before to, vvv. (Schneider prefers to read a for ra.) 

d 4. We are here brought back to the point from which we 
digressed in 779 e. 

d 5. avTovs : i.e. rovs vv/x^tov?, implied in to, vvfxffiLKd. 

d 9. oiTroSeLKvva-OaL, like d7ro<f>atv€crdaL at 780 a 1, is used for 
to produce. 

e 1. TTOLVTes . . . 7rpd^€(i)s, " all who take part in any kind of 
common work." kolvojvol is the important word. As union 
increases efficiency beyond the proportion of mere numbers, so 
failure on the part of one of the united workers does more harm 
than if he were merely spoiling work of his own. 

e 3. /JLY) €XovT€s vovv I iguorauce, as well as carelessness, may cause 
failure. This furnishes one reason for the supervision practised 
by the committee of wise women — as to whom cp. Theaet. 149 d 6. 

784 21 1- ^? elXofxeda : here, as in the -quiKa d(fiLK6fjL€da at 783b 5, 
many interpreters unaccountably translate the aor. ind. as if it were a 
subj. with civ. It is possible that the past tense stands for " whom 
you are to assume that we have chosen," but more likely Ritter is 
right in seeing here an additional sign of the lack of revision. 
When writing these words the author thought he had spoken of 
these female officials before. On revision he would have discovered 
his error. 

a 2. TOLS dp\ov(Tiv : who the magistrates are who are to 
determine the composition of this body of female officials we are 
left to guess ; possibly a committee of the vo/xocf^vXaKes. (Stallb., 
after quoting Hermann's {De vest. ii. p. 7) extraordinary statement 
that the custodes of the married pairs were some men and some 
women, apparently, in his next note, takes irpoa-rdTTeLv dp\ov<TL 
to mean "add to the number of (male) officials." But, as Ritter 
says, TTpocrrdrTeiv never has this meaning in Plato. 

a 3. oTTorav : i.e. at what intervals fresh elections were to take 
place. 

a 4. P'^XP'- '''P^'^ov pikpovs copas : the proceedings at this daily 

638 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 784 a 

gathering are also left mostly to our imagination. Among other 
things we may conclude that twenty minutes was the minimum 
time of attendance. 

a 7. vTTo (cp. Rep. 461 a 6, and Laws 917 d 8 rrj /xao-rtyt TvirTc- 
(rdii) TrAr/yas vtto Krjf^vKos iv rfj dyopai Kr]pv^avro<i (uv eVcKa ytxeAAet 
TVTTTecrdaL) : of the circumstances accompanying the laying of the 
injunctions on the wedded pair. It is the same use which occurs 
as a term of music to denote the instrument which accompanies 
a song. 

b 2. Se/ccTt? : in the state of the Republic, where there were to 
be no husbands and wives, the time during which fathers and 
mothers were to produce children "for the state" was twenty 
years {Rep. 460 e). 

b 3. oTttv, "in cases where." 

b 5. /3ovXevofX€VOv<s els to, 7rpocr<f>opa eKarepots : for this use of 
et's for "as to," or "in" cp. 775a 7 tw /xev ets xpr^xara /zey/'crTW. 
Interpreters all follow Ficinus — whose transl. is prout commodum 
utrisque est disiungantur — in taking the els clause with Sia^evyvv- 
o-^at^-" be divorced for their mutual benefit," Jowett. But the 
following sentence supports the view that it goes with fBovXevo/xe- 
vov<s. What the family conclave, with (if necessary) the help of 
the experts, had to decide was the terms of the separation, and in 
so doing to consider the interest of both parties. 

b 7. At 929 e ten vo/>io^i5AaK€s are called in to decide upon a 
divorce (for incompatibility of temper) along with ten of the female 
marriage officials. 

C 1. The MSS. have ots av eTrtr/aei/'Wo-iv otSe ra^wcrt : two 
violent assumptions have been made about this passage: — (1) that 
Kttt has dropped out before ra^wcrt, and (2) that kTrirpkireiv here 
means to order, to command. Nearly every editor has followed 
Aid. in the former point. As to the second, Ast and L. & S. 
(who cite it erroneously) give Xen. An. vi. 5. 11 as a support for 
kmrpkireiv in the sense of iubeo. But eTrerpe^ev there means " he 
gave it into their charge to . . .," " he assigned to them the duty 
of . . ." That is different from ravra eTreTpexj/ev — with no 
persons mentioned — used for "he gave these commands." (Cod. 
Voss. and a corrector of A altered rd^uxrL to rd^ovcrc.) I believe 
that Burnet has restored the original reading by simply resolving 
otSc into ot Se. As he has kindly informed me, he takes tovtois 
ifx/jLcveiv with both clauses : with the first it means " to abide by 
their reference to these arbiters," and with the second " and by 
their decision on the point referred to them " — the whole being 

639 



784 c THE LAWS OF PLATO 

equivalent to the legal term kfxjxkveiv rfj SiaLTYj (e.g. Aristoph. Wasps, 
524) ; the disputants i.e. are to acquiesce in the court , and act upon 
its decision. (It will be seen that Burnet's text would admit of 
the interpretation adopted by Winckelmann, who would read 
a oTs av kiTirpk\piii(TLv otSe ra^wcrt tovtols efXfxeveLv, " to abide by 
the decision of those to whom these (ten vofxo<f)vXaK€s) intrust it." 
But, as B. says, the original disputants are a much more appropriate 
subject to eTrLTpexpiocrLV than the ten vo/xocfivXaKes ; besides, it 
complicates the proceeding unduly, if we are to suppose a second 
delegation. — H. Richards would cut the knot by reading ofs av 
eTTLTd^oio-Lv oi'Se TovTOiS efXfMeveiv — the assumption being that 
[Kat] . . . Tct^wcrt was a marginal variant.) 

C 7. dvaypd(f>€Lv corresponds to our "post," as used of defaulters. 

d 2. For €v of the tribunal cp. above 754 e 8. — Steph. first 
recognized that rwvSe goes with dTLixos, though in his, as in the 
earlier texts, it is written twv 8e, and begins the next sentence. — 
Ficinus misinterpreted the next sentence in a curious manner, 
translating it " Nee nuptiis procreandisque liberis ulterius det 
operam : ac si id tentaverit " etc. 

d 6. e^68(Dv . . . Kat TifxMv : the " distinction " probably con- 
sisted in being attended by a train of servants. Stallb. notes that 
Theophr. Char. 25 represents the mean man as unwilling to buy a 
proper maid to attend his wife els rds i^oSovs, and that Dem. Adv. 
Olymp. 1182 describes a kratpa as k^o^ovs Xa/x7rpd<s k^iovcrav. — 
A has (ace. to Schanz) yevkcre * * wi/, the third e being in an 
erasure. Burnet says this is corrected from an original yevka-ca 
Tiov (which J. G. Schneider conjectured) ; L and have yevka-eoyv 
with yevedXiiDV in the margin. From a comparison of Ale. I. 
121c 7 — ravry Tjj rj/Jikpa jSaa-tXeoiS yevkdXta Trdcra Ovec kol kop- 
rd^ei r) 'Aa-ta — where one MS. has yevka-ta, B concludes, no doubt 
rightly, that yevka-ta here is a mistake for yevkOXca. (Stallb. 
mentions this as a possible emendation, but rejects it.) It is not 
clear whether there was any difference between the iTrtTeAetwcrets 
and the yevkOXta. Both appear to have been celebrated on the 
tenth day after the child's birth. Cp. Aristoph. Av. 494 and 922. 
The former word, as Ast and Stallb. say, has a religious significance. 

785 a 1. The subject to criyrj Keto-Ow is the regulations just 
recommended. 

a 2. TTpaTTkcrOo), "they should be put in force." 

a 5. Burnet retains the original dpxrj of A, L and 0, but differs 
from all other editors in putting a full stop after it. (Schanz 
adopts the early correction to dpxrjv, and inserts ws before fw^s.) 

640 



NOTES TO BOOK VI 785 a 

((Drjs o.px>} would thus stand as a literal quotation of the formal 
words used in the register. — Burnet also retains the MS. wapa- 
yeypdffiBoi, which many edd. have followed Orelli in changing to 
the inf. 

a 6. The ace. tov dptOfxov remains a difficulty. It seems to be 
an ace. of inner object ; " let there be added a writing giving the 
number." Perhaps we ought to accept Orelli's emendation. 

b 2. ya/xov Se opov : see above on 721 bl. — The addition of 
TOV fxaKporaTov XR- ^4^- is an indication that some variety in the 
eixactment is conceivable. 



END OF VOL. I 



Printed by K, & K. Ci-akk, Limiteo, Edinburgh. 



A HANDBOOK OF 

GREEK VASE PAINTING 

BY 

MARY A. B. HERFORD, M.A. 

Lecturer in C/assica/ Archaeology in the University of Manchester 



PRESS NOTICES 

" The production of a handbook both compact 
and readable is something of a problem, and Miss 
Herford may be congratulated on its solution. . . . 
Miss Herford's contribution is most valuable, both 
because it meets a want, and because it possesses 
individuality, a quality rare in handbooks." — Journal 
of Hellenic Studies. 

" The form and printing of the volume are 
admirable." — Discovery. 

'* The make-up of the book is admirable. . . . 
The reader who has some knowledge or is willing to 
acquire it from a more elementary handbook, will 
find Miss Herford's book more than interesting : it 
is invigorating." — The Classical Journal. 

Manchester : 
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 

12 LIME GROVE, OXFORD ROAD, MANCHESTER. 

LONGMANS, GREEN & COMPANY, 

NEW YORK, CHICAGO, BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, MADRAS. 
I 



MANCHESTER UNIVERSITY CLASSICAL SERIES. 



THE RIDDLE OF THE BACCHAE, The 
last Stage of Euripides^ Religious Views. 

By Gilbert Norwood, M.A., Professor of 
Greek in University College, Cardiff, and late 
Assistant Lecturer in Classics in the University of 
Manchester. 8vo. Gilt top. ^s. 6d. net. 

THE AUTHORSHIP OF THE PLATONIC 
EPISTLES. 

By R. Hackforth, M.A., Fellow and Classical 
Lecturer of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and 
late Assistant Lecturer in Classics in the University 
of Manchester. Crown 8vo. Gilt top. 7^. 6d. net. 

THE LAWS OF PLATO. 

The Text edited with Introduction, Notes, etc., 
by E. B. England, M.A., Litt.D., late Warden of 
Hulme Hall and Assistant Lecturer in Classics in 
the University of Manchester. 2 vols. 

Manchester : 
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 

12 LIME GROVE, OXFORD ROAD, MANCHESTER. 

LONGMANS, GREEN & COMPANV, 

NEW YORK, CHICAGO, BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, MADRAS. 

2 



in 

00 
H 























4-8S6,' 



m 



(t 



